---
title:  "2017-06-28-CLAS201"
date:   2017-06-28 12:41:18 -0400
categories: CLAS201
layout: post
---
## CLAS201, 2017-06-28



### HELLENISTIC SOCIETY


#### I. POLITICS

##### A) Poleis (City-states)

1. Democracy
    * Athens
        - 322 BC, democracy dismantled
            + survived in a limited form at Athens
            + The Lamian War
                * tried to drive out the Macedonians garrisoned in Athens, but the regent of Macedonian (who Alexander put in charge) came in and smacked Athens
                    - this was right after Alexander died
                    - The Macedonians dismantled the democracy of Athens and ran the city
        - the poleis went down the crapper. The Greek city states were fighting for position but they didn't survive in their old glory form
            + this might be an over-simplification
                * many Greek city states still maintained partial independence, and flourished
                * most couldn't determine foreign policies (because the king ruling over them would determine that)
                * but the king didn't really care about what the states did amongst themselves
        - Demetrius of Phalerum (317-307 BC)
        - When the Romans came, Athens heeded them, and the Romans sort of let them be.
            + so, Athens sort of survived as a democracy, but had to negotiate their kingdom
    * Elsewhere
        - Alexander favoured democracies
            + eg. Ionian cities
                * Alexander took over all the old Ionian coast city states. He set up democracy here
                * During the Hellenistic, there seemed to be an admiration for the Ancients of Greece
                    - so, they considered Classical Athens democracy
            + The Persians mostly liked to set up tyrants (they sometimes set up democracy)
        - Athens was an anomaly
2. Expansion of City-States
    * The Hellenistic Era could be seen as a golden age of the poleis
    * Alexander and Successors established many poleis across the east (Alexandrias)
        - this appears to be an expansion of Greek cities
        - these Greek cities were not fully independent, but neither were the city states of Ancient Greece

##### B) Federal States

1. Federations of cities (not necessarily ethnically based) with local and federal political structures
    * eg. modern provinces and a federal government umbrella
    * eg. Boeotian League
        - sometimes, depending on the politics of Boeotia, the cities of Boeotia were fighting each otehr
            + Mostly independent city states in Boeotia
            + but Thebes would come to dominate
    * Hellenistic Era
        - Aetolian League (370-189 BC)
            + this League had already formed from Classical times, but became important in Hellenistic Era
                * around 320BC, the Romans set their eyes on the Macedonians, who had allied with Hannibal (who ravaged the Italian countrysides)
                    - After the Romans finished off Hannibal, they came to end the Macedonians
                    - The Romans allied with the Aetolian League, as long as the Aetolians were friendly
                    - After the Aetolians finished off the Macedonians with Romans, they wanted to do their own business, but the Romans wanted them to follow their orders instead. Bad things happened to the Aetolians.
            + Just Aetolian cities (same dialect, religious cites, etc.)
        - Achaean League (280-146 BC)
            + Reached out to various other cities in Northern Peloponnesus
            + First allied with Romans against the Seleucid Kingdoms
            + Romans beat them up after the Achaeans didn't do what the Romans said
            + Kept fighting with Sparta


#### II. SOCIETY

##### A) Greeks

* Many opportunities for scholars, artists, and soldiers opened up in new kingdoms
    - Recall Isocrates said the Greeks needed to unite and fight against Persia, so that citizens would have something to do
        + this "problem" was solved in the Hellenistic Era by the appearance of these new Kingdoms
        + These Kings had lots of money, and liked to win prestige by winning battle
            * So, was always looking for good soldiers
            * Also focused on building large libraries and showing cultural sophistication

##### B) Non-Greeks

* Like native Persians, Babylonians, etc.
    - Some opportunities with assimilation into dominant culture were given
        + eg. Jews in Egypt
            * Lots of people in Alexandria were native Egyptians.
            * Certain ethnic groups were given more privileges than others
            * The Jewish needed to translate their old Hebrew scriptures (which they could read anymore) into Greek languages.
                - they kept their distinctive cultural practices, but assimilated into Greek society linguistically
                - In lots of ways, they also adopted Greek philosophies
            * Extension: Philo attributed the Jewish people's Monotheism with Platonism. This is another example of cultural assimilation

##### C) Women: Greater Opportunities

1. Royal women and eurgetisms
    * Women had higher positions in Hellenistic society, as compared to Classical
        - This is thought to be due to the power of the Royal women
        - esp. the Ptolemies
            + adopted some traditional Egyptian ideas, and raised the status of their royal family to the status of *deity*
            + they tended to inter-marry
                * if you are so much higher in status as royalty, who're you going to marry?
        - This exaltation, by nature, made the women much more prominent place in society
        - Ptolemy the first, and his wife, were placed side by side on a coin. They were, together, seen as divine.
    * Had inscriptions honouring the eurgetism of women
        - Eurgetism referred to being a benefactor (good-deed-doer)
            + Greek women were elected as magistrates because they gave money to their local Greek city
                - built a great public building at their expense for the sake of the city, etc.
                - this idea of eurgetism went further, and extended to rich people, and even kings
2. Education
    * eg. Hipparchia
        - Wife of a cynic philosopher named Crates
        - Was also a philosopher
            + didn't really occur in Classical Greece. Some female poets, maybe, but not philosophers