---
title:  "2017-05-03-CLAS201"
date:   2017-05-09 12:41:18 -0400
categories: CLAS201
layout: c_post
---
## CLAS201, 2017-05-03



### HISTORICAL BACKGROUND, cont'd ###


#### IV. CLASSICAL GREECE: 480-323 BC ####

The beginning of this era was marked by the accomplishment of staving off Xerxes' Persian invasion.

* Greeks were committed to freedom, so this was a big thing for them

##### A) Greek victories over the Persians #####

* against Darius I: Battle of Marathon (490 BC)
	* Darius sent an expedition to punish Athens
	* Greeks smashed the Persian invasion with a relatively small force
		* Spartans were the dominant power in Greece at the time, and agreed to help but only after the end of their on-going religious ceremony
			* they were too late, but the Greeks showed them to Persian bodies
* Xerxes (successor of Darius I): Salami/Plataea (480/479 BC)
	* the Battle of Thermopylae (movie 300), where the Spartans held the Persians at The Hot Gates
	* The Persians had a large naval army, but it was felled by a tempest.
	* This was the second Persian invasion against Greece; a response to the failure of the first invasion
* Indicative of freedom.

##### B) Delian League/Athenian Empire: (477-404 BC) #####

* After the two successful defenses against the Persians, the Athenians felt confident in their own power, and strove to defeat the Persians completely. The formed an alliance: the Delian League
	* This became over-confidence, and the Athenian Empire became possessive.
		* As people became aware that the Persians weren't much a threat anymore, they figured it was time to leave the Delian League/Athenians and cease large payments to the Empire. The Athenians would not allow anyone to withdraw the League.
		* The Athenians oppressed other Greeks
	* Note: Athenians were the most powerful on the sea.

##### C) Peloponnesian War (431-404 BC)

* The Peloponnesian League was dominated by Sparta.
* Sparta and its allies became worrisome of the oppression of other Greeks by the Athenian Empire
	* So, they went to war against the Athenians.
	* Note: Thucydides' wrote of this war with brilliance, and thus popularized it. He was an Athenia historian and general.
		* Thucydides analyzed the war and what caused it. Sparta and Athens were indirectly involved in a previous war, which caused a bit of political difference.
		* The real cause, as stated by Thucydides, "Sparta was afraid of growing Athenian power."
* In short, Sparta and the Athenians were happy with each other around the Persian invasions. However, tensions grew as the Athenians grew in power
* The Spartans won and conquered the Athenians
	* Sparta was considered the most powerful state even when the Athenians reached the peak of their powers.
	* During the second year of the war, Athens suffered from a plague that killed a quarter of their population
		* they "won" the war for the first 10 or so years, despite the devastating plague.
	* The Athenians lost, eventually, when they decided to try and conquer Sicily (which was as powerful and rich as any other city in Greece).
		* This cost the Athenians two of their forces, but they stil hung on.
* The Athenians lost in 404 BC

It's relatively easy to follow the 500-400 BC century. It's solidly divided into three sections/events.
In the time period of 404 BC and 323 BC, there were many powerful states

**The shifting hegemonies:**

1. By 395 BC, Sparta was fighting for its life. Beforehand, they were dominant, but the Greeks grew restless of their "rule."
2. By 377 BC, the Athens re-established their maritime empire. They promised to be nicer than their previous effort. The Greeks believed them

	* Between 377 and 371 BC, they were considered the dominant power in Greece
	* Eventually, by the mid 350s BC, the Athenians lost their renewed empire

3. 371-362 BC, Thebes was the dominant power

	* They were considered very innovative and creative leaders
	* Pelopidas and Epaminondas were the main leaders of Thebes, which was (more or less) a democratic state.
	* These two came up with new ways to fight wars, and were aggressive
	* Pelopidas invaded the north
	* Epaminondas invaded Sparta itself.
	* Note that Sparta had no walls. Sparta figured that they were so dominant and powerful, they invaded others—not the other way around.
		* He was unsuccessful, and the Thebans withdrawed.

4. With all the in-fighting in Greece, a semi-state known as Macedon grew.
	+ Herotudus, who wrote in the 440s BC, was fine with considering Macedons as Greeks.
		+ Other historians, like Demosthenes, didn't. Note: Demosthenes was a powerful speaker, using his oratus against the Macedons, whom he called barbarians.
	+ Regardless, Macedons became more and more Greek as time went by. In the early decades of 300 BC, they were in bad shape. By 360 BC (after a bunch of wars within Greece), Philip II of Macedon ascended as a briliant diplomat and military innovator.
		+ He brought the Macedons up, and expanded.

5. Battle of Chaeronea (338 BC)
	+ Philip II of Macedon fought against Thebes (and Athens), and smashed their armies. They pratically dominated all
		+ Sparta, did not go to Chaeronea to fight. When Philip II didn't want to go through the trouble of conquering Sparta. After this, Sparta didn't do much.
	+ After this battle, Philip II controlled the Greeks. He called for a conference and formed an alliance against the Persians.
		+ He managed to get the Greeks (who were initially against him) to unite with him based on their collective hatred against the Persians.
	+ Philip II had a son: Alexander the Great, who lead the Greeks against the Persian Empire.

Alexander the Great was extremely aggressive and fucked everything up.

* In a few years, Alexander conquered all of Persia. By 323 BC, he was the King of all of that shit.
	* This empire spanned from Macedonia down to Libya all the way to India
* He died in 323 BC (rumours of poisoning).


#### V. HELLENISTIC ERA (323-313 BC) ####

After Alexander's death, his generals took over reign, as he had no apparent heir to the throne. He had a brother and an unborn son who were both unavailable. A few different powers arose, until the Romans came and shit on everyone.

* Macedonia continued to reign
* Seleucid Empire
* Ptolmaic Empire
* Pergamum



### MINOAN CIVILIZATION

The Minoans were not Greek, but highly influence the first Greek civilization (the Mycenaeans)

* The Minoans had an impact on the collective memories of the Greeks


#### I. MINOANS IN GREEK MEMORY

##### A) Mythology: Zeus and Europa, Minos and the Minotaur, etc

* Zeus had a lust for Europa, and came down to her as a beautiful white bull with rosy breath. Europa climbed on his back and Zeus took her, across the sea, to Crete, and "had his way with her."
	* Europa conceived a child named Minos, the King of Crete
	* One incident: Minos was to sacrifice a bull (given by Poseidon) to the Gods. He saw the bull was very elegant, and elected not to.
		* Poseidon was pissed off, and some shit happens, and someone gave birth to the Minotaur.
* As expected, the Minoan civilization was named after Minos.

##### B) "History"

* Both Herodotus and Thucydides identifies Minos as the first thalassocrat. Thalasso referred to the sea.
* Crete has many major population centres.


#### II. TIMELINE

1. 3000-2000 BC: Peasant Culture
	* no elites who can marshall the resources of the community (to build big buildings)
2. 2000-1700 BC: First Palace
	* the Minoans garnered enough wealth to build sophisticated buildings
3. 1700-1400 BC: Second Palace
	* 1700 BC marked the destruction of the first palaces.
		* thought to be earthquake-related
4. 1450 BC: Mycenaean Takeover
	* The Minoans existed on Island Crete. The Mycanaeans were on land in Greece. The Minoans influenced the Mycanaens, who then invaded sometime around 1450 BC. Still, they perserved the main palace of the Minoans at Cinossus
5. 1400-1200? BC: Post-palatial period


#### III. NATURE OF MINOAN SOCIETY

##### A) Matriarchal?

* Minoan art heavily featured women.
> "The promience of females in Neopalatial art, important mortal women and goddesses, makes it possible to imagine that women dominated Neopalatial society, perhaps even politics. All human societies, however, ancient and modern, have been patriarchies with men in positions of authority; no matriarchy has ever been documented. But Neopalatial Crete offers the best candidate for a matriarchy so far."

##### B) Art

1. Frescoes: showed lively, natural, and non-propagandist content
	* people fishing, dolphins, dancing, etc
2. Seals: intricately carved miniatures
3. Use: not for political/religious propaganda as in Egypt and Mesopotamia

##### C) Architecture

1. Palaces: "agglutinative" style with large open courtyard surrounded by many, multi-purpose rooms (residential, ceremonial, storage, manufacturing)
2. Villas: similar in decoration and structure except for the lack of a central courtyard

##### D) Economy #####

1. Domestic: highly centralized "command" economy
	* The commanders would collectively figure out what the civilization needed.
	* The Central Palace declared what each region needed to produce
	* Though there's recent evidence for entrepreneurship on the peripheries. Still, the economy was highly centralized
	* Linear A
		* A script that the Minoans used to record things coming in and out of the palace. These were economic records
2. International trade: agricultural products (olive oil, textiles) for luxury goods (gemstones, ivory, amber) and metals (gold, silver, copper, tin)
	* Copper and tin were popular due to their usages in making bronze
	* Note: There are suggestions that trade was largely cermonial-based. Personal relationships between rulers invited trades as dowries.
		- Guest-friendship was very prevalent back then. Guests, strangers or not, were considered friends, and this guest-friendship could last for generations. As a result, rulers and kings would give goods to other states as dowries and gifts.

##### E) Politics #####

1. Monarchy?
2. One central authority (Cnossus) or multiple?
	* Cnossus would, potentially, have one central seat (a throne, per se)
	* If there were multiple authorities, then different states (of different rule) should have different imageries and cultural significances. For example, different nations have flags. However, in Greek society, all the states used a double-axe as their popular symbol, suggesting they all fell under one rule/authority/culture.
3. Wider Aegean (Cyclades, mainland esp. Athens)
	* There are many Minoan sites with similar architecture/art located in this region
	* Certain Greek myths suggest that some mainland states were controlled by the Minoans.
	* Side note: 1628 BC: Large volcanic eruption (the "Greek Pompei")

##### F) Religion

1. Mother-Goddess?
	* Priesthood was largely female, consisting of mostly priestesses
	* It's also likely that were were multiple gods being worshipped
2. Natural sanctuaries
	* No monumental temples
	* Minoans used caves (to worship chthonic and/or fertility deities?), hilltops (for Olympian deities), trees
		- this is in contrast to the Greeks of later times, who built temples for so many of their Gods and Goddesses
		- this is also in contrast to other nations like Egypt, who built massive free-standing temples for their religion
	* In caves, body parts were found, suggesting this was a place for healing
		- A Chthonic deity is associated with the ground (and what's under it)
	* Note: it does seem like they had some shrines within their palaces
3. Summoning rituals
	* Instead of the divine presence of a cult statue (?)
