---
title:  "2017-06-21-CLAS201"
date:   2017-06-21 12:41:18 -0400
categories: CLAS201
layout: post
---
## CLAS201, 2017-06-21



### ALEXANDER THE GREAT


#### I. BIRTH & ANCESTRY

##### A) Birth (356 BC)

* Mother: Olympias, Molossian princess
    - Married Philip II to cement the Thessalian alliance
    - By all accounts, a formidable woman
    - After the death of Alexander the Great, became very powerful politically. Often wrote letters to Alexander regarding states not doing what she wanted.
        + Women seemed to have a higher position in the Hellenistic era than previous eras
        + A harbinger of ...
* Siblings: full sister, Cleopatra (younger sister), half-brother, Arrhidaeus (older, but unsuitable for kingship)
* clear heir to the throne

##### B) Ancestry

* Descendent from Heracles on his father's side, and Achilles on his mother's side
    - cf. son of Ammon
        + son of Zeus. However, this would make him an equal of Heracles
        + Olympias seems to have something to do with this
            * apparently, said that when she became pregnant, she found a snake in her bed, a symbol of divinity
            * this gave Alexander a problem, since 
    - cf. *Iliad* and tomb sacrifice
    - Philip's family was considered descendents of the royal family of Argos
        + Traditionally, the Greeks said this royal family was descendent from Heracles, so this claim made sense historically
        + Became a very aggressive military leader
        + Kept the *Iliad* with him
            - Kept a dagger under his pillow, along with a copy of the *Iliad*


#### II. EARLY LIFE

##### A) Education

* Greek tutors, including Aristotle
    - cf. Callisthenes
        + a nephew of Aristotle, also well-educated and known to be a literary scholar
        + brought by Aristotle to be the court historian, to write the story of Aristotle in the most effective way possible
* Sources of Alexander's life
    - lots of people/eye-witnesses wrote the events of his life
    - many of his generals
    - lots of phyiscal accounts, but few of these accounts survived
        + historians tried to piece his life together
    - had some secondary sources
    - how do we tell which account is correct?
* Prodigy:
    - tamed Bucephalus, the untamable horse at 12 yrs old
    - regent (16)
    - cavalry commander at Chaeronea (18)


#### III. ACCESSION TO THE THRONE

##### A) Challenges

* Cleopatra and family
    - Olympias and Alexander eliminated Cleopatra and her daughter. Philip II and Cleopatra's marriage was a threat to Alexander's position
        + 
* Amyntas IV, original heir to Perdiccas III
    - Philip II came to the throne, initially, as a regent to Amyntas IV
    - Eventually, Philip II chose to seek the throne instead of remaining a regent
* Regardless, Alexander's kingship probably wasn't in danger
    - He was a regent, and such a successful military hero

##### B) Consolidation

* Philip II was highly successful. So, when Alexander came to the throne at a very young age of 20, there was some doubt
* Greece
    - affirmed as a hegemon of the Corinthian League

* Thebes
    - still didn't like how Macedonia was doing things
    - talked some shit about Alexander (reporting/over-exaggerating his supposed death)
        + Alexander marched over and wooped them before they could ally with other states against Macedonia
    - Alexander razed all their buildings except the temples and Pindar's house


#### IV. CONQUEST OF ASIA

##### A) Invasion

* Combined real aggression and confidence, and blasted Asia
* Granicus River (334 BC)
    - first major battle
* Issus (333 BC)
    - control of royal family & treasury

...

##### C) King of Asia

1. Battle of Gaugamela (331 BC)
    * Darius was ready to give Alexander (bribe him) in order to achieve peace. Alexander was offered half the Persian kingdom, but the fucker wanted it all.
    * Alexander finally smashes Darius and gains access to the heartland of the Persian Empire.
        - Didn't capture or kill Darius, who ran away
2. Babylon, Susa, Persepolis
    * Alexander allowed Satraps to keep their administrator positions
    * Goes to Marduk and accustoms himself to local customs
        - So that the Persians can see him as one of "them", rather than a barbaric invader
    * At Susa, the gates were open to him, and he treated people quite nicely, and followed local customs
    * At Persepolis, his mood changes, and famously burned the city to the ground
        - not because Persepolis resisted him
        - Persepolis was the traditional capital of the Persians themselves
            + the Babylonians were in the Persian Empire, but they weren't persians
            + Neither was Susa, really
        - Alexander appeals to his Greco-Macedonian/Greek followers and destroys the Persians
            + Shows that he is very politically astute
3. Death of Darius (330 BC)
    * Alexander presents himself as a protector of the Persian royal family.
    * Darius III was killed by the Satrap Bessus
4. Going Native
    * dress, proskynesis, Roxane
        - very clear political goal: to win over the Persians
    * Roxanna and Alexaner bear a child, which didn't sit well with the Macedonians
        - This probably didn't sit well with them, and may have led to a resistance
    * Macedonian Resistance
        - Clatus, who saved Alexander in a previous battle, was skewered by Alexander by a spear for complaining about his Persian assimilation
        - A number of the Pages began rebellion, trying to kill Alexander. These Pages were discovered  
            + and Calisthenes was killed as well
        - Things were not going well between Alexander and the Macedonian rebellions
            + These never really bothered or threatened his power

##### D) India

India at the time refered to the area of Pakistan. The broader idea of India

* Afghanistan and Pakistan
* Indus River, etc.

1. Initial victories
    * Hydaspes (326 BC)
        - offered lots of issues for Alexander in the beginning of this conquest.
        - Allied with King Taxiles to defeat King Hydaspes
        - Instead of attacking across the flooded Hydaspes River, Alexander went around, further upstream, crossed the river, and came crashing down on Porus (the King of Hydaspes) and his elephant army from the north (during the night)
            + Won a great victory
            + But so impressed with Porus (his air of nobility) that he offers him continued kingship, against the behest of Taxiles
2. Refusal of soldiers
    * When Alexander realized there was still a lot of Indian land to claim, he was not daunted
    * ...
3. Return home (325 BC)
    * One of Alexander's commanders took a bunch of money and returned to Greece.
    * Eventually, Alexander got back and settled
    * Still, went back to try to merge the Persian elite and Macedonian elite into one fused elite.
        - Married some daughter(s) of past kings of Persia
        - Ordered nine of so of his commanders to marry into Persian nobility
        - Married thousands of people to Persian citizens
    * By all accounts, doesn't look like Alexander's followers (esp. his generals) thought this was a good idea
    * Alexander died in 323 BC, and when he did, almost every one of his commanders left their Persian wives.
4. Death, in Babylon (323 BC)
    * Some say he was poisoned
    * Most historians believe he died of some kind of infection or disease
        - he languished for a couple of weeks with a high fever, and eventually succumbed
        - it's thought his body was weak due to his years of conquest, causing him to be susceptible to disease

##### E) Final Actions and Plans

* Asian marriages
* Persian "successor" infantry
    - Up to this point, the Macedonians acted as the crack infantry troops
        + hetairoi, foot companions close to the king
        + Alexander replaces the pezatairoi with his new Persian troops
            * to be fair, his old phalanxes were getting old
            * he sent 10,000 back to Macedonian to retire
                - lots of tension amongst the common soldiers about the new Persian troops, so this helped quell that situation
    - Called these new Persian infantry, the "successors"
        + kind of weird
* Future conquests (Arabia and Carthage)
    - Looked like he was planning to conquer Arabia, but he died and wasn't able to fulfill these plans
    - In some ancient accounts, he was planning to conquer Carthage as well
        + basically the entire Mediterranean
            * some contention over this


#### V. EVALUATION

He is called "the Great," after all

##### A) Opinions on Alexander

* early 20th century, people thought Alexander as a great conqueror
    - this is the hayday of western conquerors
        + Britain and other European empires would think Alexander was great
    - we can look at him as just a politician who conquered and colonized and did what he could to stay in power...
* Proponent of Hellenism?
    - Alexander liked literature and Greek culture in every way
    - He brought the superior culture of the west to the east
    - Planted many of Greek cities (recall the near 70 Alexandrias)
* Uniter of humanity?
    - eg. Alexander was not xenophobia
    - Conquered Persia, but elected to assimilate them into the Macedonian Empire
        + even though the Macedonians didn't appreciate that
        + granted, it could have been a purely political decision (to win favour), but we can potentially read him as a uniter
* Brutal conqueror?
    - nowadays, attitudes toward conquest and colonialism have changed dramatically, so we can certainly view him as brutal, but the times were different back then
    - Of course, opinions on Alexander change as societal culture changes.


#### VI. SUCCESSORS

After the death of Alexander, his offspring did not succeed him. He had a young son (Alexander IV), but he was used as a political pawn by Macedonian generals

* He was killed when he was 13 or 14
* The heir of Alexander was good propaganda value
    - the generals didn't want him on the throne (people would think 13 or 14 is a ripe time to take the throne)
* Alexander had some half-brothers who was also killed
    - Macedonian generals took over

__The Ptolmeic Kingdom__

* Ptolemy settled down in Egypt and took over, beginning the Ptolmeic Kingdom. The last of the Ptolemies was Cleopatra VII.
* The Ptolemies tended to ally themselves with the Romans. The king

__The Seleucid Kingdom__

* Again, one of the commanders of Alexander
* Wasn't as quick as Ptolemy, but also managed to rule some land north of Egypt

__The Antigonid Empire__

...

__The Roman Empire__

* One of the first Greek states to fall was the Macedons
* The Romans hated kings, which played a small role in their destruction of the Greeks
    - Conquered the Seleucids
    - Conquered the Ptolmeics after Cleopatra played the wrong cards