---
title:  "2017-05-10-CLAS201"
date:   2017-05-09 12:41:18 -0400
categories: CLAS201
---
2017-05-10-CLAS201

Suggestions as to why the Mycenaeans fell

* Earthquakes that caused massive destruction?
* Trade routes collapsed?
* Common people had enough of their rulers, and rebelled?
* Environmental issues, like droughts?
    - Tree-ring growth and ice-core samples suggest that there was a drought. This put stress on the kingdoms in a dominoe-effect manner
* Combination of things

> It is obvious that man is by nature a political animal
>
> Aristotle, Politics 1253a



### Greek Polis


#### I. DEFINITION

> A geographical area comprising a city and its adjacent territory, which together make up a single, self-governing political unit
>
> Ancient Greence, p. 104


#### II. FORMATION

##### A) Reasons for synoecism (late Dark Age)

1. Growth in population and economic sophistication
    * When the Mycenaeans collapsed, population took a hit. Eventually though, it improved. By 750 BC, it was a lot better
    * Growing sophistication in metalwork
        - Greeks were no longer in the bronze age. They used iron for most of their tasks. Iron required more expertise to use, hotter furnaces to smelt, etc
        - The complexity created a need for a larger number of craftsmen
        - The complexity introduced in trade also advance the civilization. To import iron, you needed other civilizations with the necessary infrastructure and wealth.
2. Protection, since early urban centres were fortified
3. Religion with urban festivals drawing surrounding populations
4. Compulsion?
    * Religious centres were in urban areas, and large festivals/parties drew in lots of people
    * This made people feel "together", due to these regional religious centres. Even though they were from different city states, they were united in religion
        - if each city state were separate and fiercely independent, why did they feel Greek at all?
        - The festival of Olympia (Panhellenic) brought Greeks from all different city states
    * Eleusis was a town within the Athenian state. Stories say Eleusis attacked Athens, not the other way around.


#### III. DIVERSITY (over 1000 named in sources)

##### A) Typical polis

Sicyon, 360 sq. km., less than 1000 citizens in population of 3000+

##### B) Untypical poleis

1. Athens: 26000 sq. km.
    * 25,000-30,000 citizens in total population of 275,000
        - during the time of the Athenian democracy in the Classical Era
        - How come only 10% of the population are Greek citizens?
            + Athens was a major political centre. Lots of slaves and metics (for trade, etc)
    * Synoecism by wide granting of citizenship
        - How did Athens become so large with such a high population?
            + They just went around and told people to join them in return for making them full citizens
        - Thucydides
            > King Theseus went around and shut down town halls and told the town they were going to be Athenian citizens
    * Not terribly large, but much larger than Sicyon
    * The Athenian Empire spanned from Athens to Marathon
        - Also had a border fort at Phyle
2. Sparta: amalgam of 4 villages, plus Amyclae later
    * Controlled a larger area than Athens did.
    * Some sources stated that Amyclae was forced to join
        - It was relatively far away, while the 4 villages were close
    * no common religious centre (Athena v. Apollo) and no wall.
        - Sparta reflected its amalgamation. The Amyclae didn't recognize themselves as Spartans even a century after the amalgamation—and nor did the Spartan state. During a festival to Apollo, the Amyclaens would return to their region.
    * Incorporated wider areas through conquest
        - Very different from Athens
            + Indicative of the contrast between Sparta and Athens, while both are quintessentially Greek. They often differ, but were both Greeks.
        - Sparta was known to be laconic. Defeated people while saying little.
    * At its peak, Sparta probably had 5,000 full citizens (at the beginning of the Classical Era).
        - 2,000 by the Hellenistic Era
        - While the area was easily twice the size of Athens, they only had a small fraction of the population
    * Conquered Messenia, along with its own Laconia territory


#### IV. UNIQUE CHARACTER: CITIZENSHIP

##### A) Polis is defined as its citizens

**Not its geographical extent or its ruler/bureaucratic structure**

> A polis is not where there are stones or wood, or the craft of builders; a polis and its walls are found wherever there are men able to defend themselves
>
> Alcaeus, fr. 426; trans. M. A. Sears

Background:

* The Athenians got too excited during the Peloponnesian war. They decided to conquer Sicily, and so sent two armadas to the maritime state. The Athenians got slapped.
    - Lost both fleets and thousands of soldiers.
* Nicias tried to convince the Athenians to not attack Syracuse.
    - Unfortunately(?) he was outwitted (or just generally not paid attention to).
* The Thucydides story is, apparently, epic.

> And then look at yourselves, mark the numbers and efficiency of the hoplites marching in your ranks, and do not give way too much to despondency, but reflect that you are yourselves at once a city wherever you sit down…The one thought of each man being that the spot on which he may be forced to fight must be conquered and held as his country and stronghold ... Men make the city and not walls or ships without men in them.
>
> General Nicias, Thuc. 7.77

* While marching home from the slapping at Sicily, Nicias told his soldiers that they are not lost, or in despair. They are a city, themselves, simply because they are citizens.
    - "Men make the city and not the walls or ships ..."

##### B) Principle of citizenship: equality

1. At Athens, all citizens rule and are ruled in turn
2. In Sparta, all citizens (homoioi) live together with the same lifestyle
3. Caveat, equality may have arisen from the idea of the value of each citizen
    * kaloi kagathoi v. kakoi
        - When Greek city states first arose, they were virtually all aristocracies. Some were considered elite. Others, commoners.
            + The kaloi kagathoi referred to the elite
            + The latter referred to, literally, the "enemy."
        - Through a series of circumstances, those who had a modest value (like commoners), came to be worth the same as the elites. **This wasn't how it originally was.**
        - Athens became a full radical democracy when it depended on its navy for military power.
            + The navy was powered by the commmoners. Thus, the **exact** time Athens became a democracy corresponded to the commoners starting to power their navy.
        - In short, equality was developed. It didn't originate from the beginning.
    * Early poleis were aristocracies with distinct elite class
    * Suppose a citizen won a lottery of some sort. The person became a magistrate
        - The idea is that every citizen is competent (enough) to rule
    * Leaders should be sophisticated thinkers—although everyone strove to be such.
