---
title:  "2017-06-07-CLAS201"
date:   2017-06-07 12:41:18 -0400
categories: CLAS201
layout: post
---
## CLAS201, 2017-06-07



### SLAVERY


#### I. SOURCE OF SLAVES

Raising slaves in your own

* The children of slaves would be born into slavery, though this doens't seem to be the common way to get slaves in the Ancient world
* Slaves were an economic factor
    - If raising slaves was not monetarily efficient, then it wouldn't be benefitial
* Slaves could be bought for specific tasks, like for certain skills
* Slaves found in slave markets often came from raids

##### A) Purchasing Slaves

* Purchased slaves far outnumbered home-born slaves
* Originally obtained by raiding, trading, and capturing cities in war
* Raiding was a prime component in gaining slaves
    - Plato himself was almost a slave
* During the Delian League, as the Athenians became more oppressive to their "allies" and subject states, they would take cities, slaughter the men, and take the children for their slave market
    - Near the end of the Peloponnesian War, the Athenians were afraid that their enemies would do onto them what they did to their captured cities.
        + When the war ended, the Spartans were remarkably lenient. Disband the navy and tear down the longwall and all was good.
        + Corinth and Thebes (allies of Sparta at the time) were upset about that

##### B) Greeks v. Foreigners

* It was not considered right to enslave Greeks, so most slaves were *barbaroi*
    - Thracians, Scythians, Phrygians, Phonoecians, Ethiopians, etc.
    - Still, supposedly 30% of slaves sold were Greeks
* Note, the Greeks like to dichotomize things
    - Free and slaves; Greek and barbarian (*barbaroi*, or more generally, non-Greek); Rich and poor;
        + The Greeks liked their slaves to be barbarians/non-Greek


#### II. SLAVE LABOUR

##### A) Unskilled: mines, fields, factories

* Most scholars think even the well-off farmers had slaves
* There's some debate, but it seems that only the poorest farms didn't have slaves
* Maybe 20-50 workers in a factory
* Female slaves would work with wool and linen

##### B) Skilled: craftsmen

* Blacksmiths, Silversmiths, Goldsmiths, etc
* Often worked with owners and other free workers
    - A little problematic, since the Greeks wanted to make the distinction between slaves and free.
    - So, free workers didn't really want to work for the same person as a slave

##### C) Highly skilled

* Traders, bankers, managers, physicians
    - Traders would travel on behalf of their owners
    - People wouldn't naturally hire people to manage their farms, because it might be too close to slave work
        + so, they'd choose a rather smart slave(s) to manage their estate
* Often with special privileges
    - Often lived on their own, and lived like free people
    - This wasn't common
    - These slaves could sometimes have whole families
        + However, their children and family could be sold away as slaves at any time
    - It's worth noting that if these slaves have families, they could be seen as leverage
        + A skilled slave acting as a trader/merchant could just run off with the goods, but not if their families were stil back home

##### D) Domestic

* Esp. nurses, who could be treated with great affection
    - The mother of the child doens't raise the child on a day-to-day hands-on basis.
    - So, they'd have a slave who would nurse the child
* There are inscriptions that suggest warm relationships between the nurse and family
    - Typically, slaves would be buried in meager ways. However, these nurses would have gravestones and inscriptions in which they were affectionately described

##### E) Public Slaves

* Scythian archers, public administrators for administrative continuity


#### III. IDEOLOGY OF SLAVERY

##### A) Dinstinction between slave and free was "somatic" but "psychic"

Psychic refers to "having to do with the soul"

- In other Ancient times, you could identify slaves through the colour of one's skin, which would refer to a somatic difference
- For the Greeks, they didn't have some physical differences, so they identified slaves by their inferior soul
- The *Old Oligarch* was complaining that you can't tell the difference a free person, a metic, or a slave
    + Because there were so many poor free people
    + If you get slighted by someone, you can't hit them because you couldn't tell what status that person was


#### IV. MANUMISSION

* Slaves could run and get away with it
    - Pancleon, for example
        + Looks like he could have been a slave, but managed to pass himself off as a free Plataean
* Slaves could be set free with obligations to their old master
    - Status would be changed to metic
    - These slaves would still be obligated to vote in favour of their old masters
    - Didn't happen often for the Greeks, but did for the Romans (by the thousands)
        + the Romans had so many slaves, so they simply let some go, and these slaves because citizens
* Sometimes, masters allowed slaves to buy their freedom



### GENDER AND SEXUALITY


##### Introduction; the problem of sources

1. Literary
    * Almost entirely from (elite) males except for Sappho (ca. 600BC)
    * Don't have women talking about their own experience
2. Art
    * Less elite but both producers and consumers were male
        - poets and writers were writing from the elite position as well as the free male position.
    * Women on vase sculptors, for example, were drawn by men
    * Consumers referred to the people who bought the art
        - This art was (primarily) bought for drinking parties, for the symposium
        - The males bought this art for their male-only drinking parties
        - A respectable free Greek woman would not attend a symposium
3. Material remains
    * personal items and gendered space more equally perserved
        - archeologists can find tools/items used by both men and women
    * There are portrayals of other groups in the Ancient world who don't speak for themselves
        - We don't have direct sources from the Spartans themselves
        - It's more or less the same for women


#### I. GENDER

##### A) Constructionism v. Essentialism

1. Constructionism
    * Ideas of gender are socially constructed (explicitly and implicitly)
2. Essentialism
    * "Men and women have different natures innate to their biological identity"
        - Glazebrook, p.268

##### B) Gender Construction

1. No spectrum in ancient Greece
2. Traditional
    * Male: the virtuous sex
        - dominant, active, rational, self-controlled
        - eg. art: nudes, muscular with small genitalia
            + this is in constrast to the satyrs, half-man half-beasts who would have large genitalia and are always aroused, indicating a lack of self-control and rationale
    * Female: inferior
        - passive, submissive, irrational, lacks self-control
        - eg. art: females are covered with clothing
            + cf. hysteria from the Greek word hystera (womb)
                * hysterical: out of control
        - eg. humour of Aristophanes' *Lysistrata & Ecclesiazousae*
            + *Lysistrata* was a play about an Athenian priestess who organizes a riot with the women of Athens and Sparta (during the Peloponnesian War) and goes on a sex-strike until peace is achieved
            + cf. Clytemnestra and Antigone
                * Clytemnestra is portrayed as a very strong woman in the story in which she wraps Agamemnon in a bathrobe and slays him with an axe
                    - She takes the role of a man, basically
                    - This is a horror story
                    - She is killed by her son in the end
                * Sophocles portrays Antigone as a very strong woman who is remarkably positive figure
                    - What is he trying to achieve?
                    - Antigone must bury her family as her duty. However, she must resist the decision of King Creon who decreed it, since Antigone's brother was outside of the city walls.
                        + She goes and buries her brother nonetheless
                            * And stands against Creon, even though she's doing the right thing
                        + Antigone dies in the end, like most aggressive women in plays. This "restores" the balance in the traditional view of gender in ancient Greece
                        + She is banished to a cave to die in hunger
                            * Instead of succumbing to her slow death, she hangs herself.
                        + Her fiance comes and opens the cave. He sees Antigone's hanging body and kills himself. Note, he is the son of King Creon. Creon's wife sees her dead son and kills herself, too.
3. Sophistic: complementarian equality
    * People don't usually see sophists as subverting societal norms in a good way
    * ...


#### II. SEXUALITY

##### A) Gender Roles

* Greek sexuality was based on gender roles, not sexual orientation
* NB. Sexual double standard
    - male: promiscuity was fine except with a married woman
    - female: no heterosexual infidelity allowed

##### B) Greek Pederasty

Marriage wasn't about two people falling in love and going through life together, but rather for reproduction.

1. Stages
    * Eromenos (beloved) as a teen (12-18 yrs)
        - older male would bring a rooster, as a present, to win over the Eromenos
    * Erastes (lover) as a twenty-something
        - the Erastes, with a beard, pursues an Eromenos
        - the dominant partner
        - Zeus himself was portrayed as participating in this kind of pederasty, although it wasn't common for him in general
            + Zeus would pursue heterosexual relationships outside of marriage
            + The Aristocrats needed some superiority, and this came in the form of being descendents of Zeus.
                * This meant Zeus had to have numerous heterosexual relationships with mortals
    * Heterosexual marriage after 30
2. Etiquette
    * For the erastes
        - should be a model of virtue
        - should abstain from penetration
            + The Greeks allowed males who weren't fully citizens (yet) to partially assimilate to the passitivity of the female
        - cf. 50 lashes for a slave who was erastes to a citizen
            + the erastes is supposed to be virtuous and manly, and only citizens could be such
            + The Greeks saw slaves in a similar category as the females, so they could not take the position of an erastes
    * For the eromenos
        - should be modest and hard to get
            + only succumbs to the erastes after seeing his virtuousity and self-control
        - should have no sexual pleasure in the relationship
        - cf. Romans had no such practice(?)
3. Status
    * A higher form of sexual expression than heterosexuality
        - eg. Plato's *Symposium*
            + the topic of the god Eros--the highest form of erotic expression is the love and desire for that which is ultimately good, true, just, and right
        - eg. Harmodius (eromenos) and Aristogeiton (erastes)
            + ...
            + the two plotted to kill Hipparcus and his brother
                * though they didn't kill his brother (the tyrant), the story was passed down as if they did, and they were honoured with a double-statue honouring them

##### C) Female Sexuality

We don't know much about female sexuality because only males wrote literature.

1. Gender Role
    * passive, and largely secluded
        - kept at home by their families to keep them from sexual relationships
        - eg. poorer families' daughters would be send out fetching water
            + richer families would send slaves
    * upon marriage, would still be secluded in the house
2. Lesbianism
    * conformed partially to male pederasty
        - eg. Sappho
            + only female poet to survive from the ancient world
            + shows clear parallels between pederasty and her relationships with her students
            + has poems in which she longs for one of her "lovely" students
            + envious of her young former charges' husbands
            + Some who have analyzed Sappho's poems suggest that lesbian pederasty involved a more equal relationship, although there was a clear age difference. Still, the dominant partner is not as clear.
    * NB. Relative silence of male sources points to apathy
        - Males simply don't care about female relationships