---
title:  "2017-05-31-CLAS201"
date:   2017-05-31 12:41:18 -0400
categories: CLAS201
layout: post
---
## CLAS201, 2017-05-31



### HEALTH AND DISEASE IN ANCIENT GREECE


#### I. MEDICINE

##### A) Superstition

* Disease caused by the gods or curses
    - e.g. plague on Greek camp in *Iliad*
        + book starts in the Greek camp. People and animals are dying in/near the camp. They go to Calcus the prophet, who determines that Apollo is angry at King Agamemnon
            * Because Agamemnon took a woman captive in a raid. It was not a context, contextually, to take hostages.
            * However, the family of the taken woman offered gifts and compensation, and the King refused it. He kept their daughter, Chryseis, captive.
            * Apollo then casts a plague on the Greeks
                - this caused Agamemnon to return Chryseis, albeit relunctantly
        + this story shows that gods had much to do with health and disease
    - e.g. plague in Thebes in *Oedipus Rex*
        + Oedipus becomes King of Thebes, which gets hit by a plague
            * Thebes sends a delegation to Delphi, and Apollo says that it's due to Oedipus himself, who killed the old king, continuing to live in Thebes.
            * Oedipus needed to be exiled, and poked his own eyes out and exiled himself.
        + The plague was sent because the gods were angry

##### B) Rise of Medicine

1. The "rationalist" movement
    * This is seen in writings of natural philosophers and historians
    * In Hesiod's *Theogony*, he described a very mythological view of the world and its creation, which came from the gods.
        - This was still systematic, in a sense
        - The idea is that the gods were directly involved
        - It also caused natural philosophers to start thinkin about how the world came to be in a natural way.
            + Water is all around
            + Earth is condensed air
            + Fire is expanded air
                * This seemed pretty interesting at the time, as a counter to mythological explanations
    * In the *Iliad*, Homer described the war as having intervention from the gods, where Athena and Ares took sides in the war
        - again, this is an unnatural explanation, and some sought a more non-mythological idea
    * Similarly, the beginning of the Minoan civilization involved Zeus impregnating a woman in a cow sculpture.
        - very unnatural explanation to how the Minoans came to be
2. Hippocratic writings
    * Health was based on the four humours (fluids): blood, phlegm, bile, and black bile
        - if you were healthy, the four humours were balanced
            + obviously, the Greeks had no idea about pathogens, and viruses, so it's not unnatural to think that they believed these ideas
            + e.g. Sickness with cold and high phlegm means your body had an abundance of phlegm, and the body needed to achieve a balance again
        - solutions like bloodletting can be attributed to these (relatively) primitive ideas of health
            + as far as they knew, this made sense, and didn't have anything to do with divine forces and godly intervention
    * Effectiveness of medicines: much not effective, but did have effective herbal remedies (e.g. Ephredra) and surgeries perhaps (e.g. Trepanation)
        - Ephredra was used to hemorrhage wounds and cease bleeding
        - Also where were get ephredrine, known to coagulate blood
            + so, it makes sense that these were effective in solving their issues back then
        - Surgery, on the other hand, was only done under very extreme conditions. They didn't really know what caused infections, so only rarely cut into someone else's body.
            + When they would, they didn't really disinfect. Still, the Hippocratic oath talked about avoiding surgeries
        - Trepanation involves relieving pressure in the cranium, which caused brain bruising. They'd bore holes into the skull to release pressure
    * Note that ancient Greece writers like to attribute findings and achievements to a single person
3. Asclepius, god of healing and patron deity of physicians
    * Superstitious thinking, along with a natural approach to healing
    * Various shrines and temples were dedicated to Asclepius.
        - People would approach and give offerings in hopes of being healed
        - Incubation
            + sick beings would sleep in the wellness area (incubate). Asclepius would appear to you and heal you.
    * Even today, you see a combination of rational and mythological healing
        - e.g. Christianity
            + people may pray to God for healing, while going to a doctor. Maybe they'd pray to a doctor to do well.
            + This reflects Asclepius in Ancient Greece, where he signified a combination of mythological and natural healing.
    * Snakes went underground (lots of powers in the Earth), also shed skin (regenerated)
        - There was the idea that snakes were powerful healers
        

#### II. STAGES OF LIFE

##### A) Childbirth and Infancy

1. Childbirth and aftermath was dangerous for mother and child because of trauma, infection, and bleeding
    * Childbirth was not very advanced (relatively)
    * Mother's immune system was weaker, and made her more susceptible to infection. The baby's immunity doens't develop for a few weeks, so there'd be lots of deaths due to infection
    * Very possible for a child to survive after childbirth, but then set out to die for various reasons
        - e.g. families who could not afford an additional child
        - e.g. Sparta, who casted out deformed/weak children
2. Note, also the danger of exposure for a child, esp. those with deformities of any sort

##### B) Childhood

##### C) Adulthood

1. Infectious diseases were common, esp. in crowded cities
    * cf. Athenian Plague (430 BC)
        - Right at the beginning stages of the Peloponnesian War
        - Pericles had convinced people from all regions of Greece from the fields and coasts to join in the city
            + and be protected by Athenian wall
            + this meant many more thousands than normal were crowded behind the walls, and the effects of the infectious disease was exacerbated
                * note, scholars don't know the actual disease
        - Theucydides described the plague in detail (he had caught it as well)
            + Everyone who got the plague was immune to it the following year
            + It afflicted the Athenians in annual waves, over 3 years
            + Said it didn't matter if you prayed to the gods. The good people weren't any more immune to it than the wicked
                * He was very doubtful of the attribution of health and disease to gods
2. Environmental issues, esp. smoky air from home and factory
    * esp. Blacksmiths
        - Craftsmen in bronzemaking factories (with furnaces, etc.) were oft exposed to poor air
        - Note that the Greeks didn't think noble citizens were to be craftsmen, though the occupation did require skill
    * Homes had hearths, which added unhealthy air to poorly ventilated homes
3. Lifespan
    * 50 (women)
    * 60 (men)
        - Men were generally treated better. They had better access to food and water, etc.
    * Sometimes much longer
        - e.g. King Agesilaus
            + died around 84 years old, as he returned from a campaign in Egypt