---
title:  "2017-05-17-CLAS201"
date:   2017-05-17 12:41:18 -0400
categories: CLAS201
layout: post
---
## CLAS201, 2017-05-17



### SPARTA


#### Intro: Reality and Mirage

##### A) Issue

1. Reality
    * A truly remarkable state
2. Mirage
    * An ideal state of laconizers and philosophers
        - In many states in Greece (in classical times, in Athens), there were laconizers (i.e. Sparta-lovers). These people thought that the Sparta-way was superior and ideal for every Greek state
        - During the Peloponnesian war, there were groups that were so pro-Sparta that were they an internal threat to Athens
            + Most famous laconizer in Athens was Critias
        - Most of the survived writing is from Athens.
            + Most historians from Athens say that the Spartans had the ideal state(?) 

##### B) Basis of Mirage

1. Sparta's relatively closed society
    * Many people go to Athens for different reasons. Economic, political, etc. It was on the sea and it was an economic power. It was a democracy, and considered a hub for the region.
    * The Spartans, on the other hand, was quite the opposite
        - Sparta was not a hub of trade, nor intellectual endeavour, nor artistic endeavour
    * Historically non-talkative
        - Laconic: "From the territory of Laconia", also meaning non-talkative
2. Sparta's uniquely focussed austerity and militarism
3. Virtually no Spartan sources
    * There were many historians who wrote about the Spartans. For example, Herodotus who documented the Persian war. He was from Halicarnassus and probably never visited Sparta
    * Xenophon joined a Spartan army in Asia, and became a friend to the Spartan king. Spent 20 years in Spartan territory and wrote a lot about the state. He seems very idealistic about Sparta

##### C) Humble's Caveats

1. Strict militarism
    * Every citizen had the obligation to contribute to the well-being of the state. Perhaps even deprive one-self for the sake of the state
        - The primary way to contribute is to be a soldier to defend the state
2. Shadow of the Helots
    * Helots were serfs that the Spartan economy was based on
    * Had a few meager rights. Had to produce food for the Spartans. Sparta mobilized itself militarily because they were always afraid that the Helots would revolt

These points serve to add some caveats as to why Sparta was so highly militaristics.


#### I. DEVELOPMENT OF THE STATE

##### A) Synoecisms: 4 villages & Amyclae (800 BC)

Instead of colonizing, Spartans just conquered the villages near them.

##### B) Expansion in Laconia (first half of 8th century BC)

1. Territorial Expansion in Greece (instead of Colonization?)
    * though, cf. Taras/Tarentum
        - There was a group of disenfranchised Spartans (of illegitimate birth). These people couldn't be full Spartan citizens, so the state told them to go form a colony of their own overseas
            + This was a colonization for political reasons, it seems
            + Caused by a group of people who were not full citizens but felt they should be
                * This was a commonly occurring issue. Sparta seems to restrict citizenship

##### C) Expansion in Messenia

Roughly by 750 BC, Sparta had conquered the entire southern portion of the Peloponnesus (and more). And so, they went over the mountains to the left of the Laconia. The Messenian territory had rich lands.

1. First Messenian War (740-720? BC)
2. Second Messenian War, after the Battle of Hysiae
    * Once Sparta had conquered Messenia, they had to go north, notably Argolis (to the north-east of Laconia)
        - main city: Argos
        - It looked like the Argos resisted (they were traditional enemies)
    * The Battle of Hysiae (a loss against the Argos) ignited the Messenians to rebel
        - The counter-action against this revolt took decades and lots of resources
    * After the Second Messenian War, the Spartans decided that in order to keep their conquered land (which was a relatively large territory), they'll need to focus on their military.
        - They made their full-time citizens into **full-time professional soldiers**
            + They could do some shit with the hoplite phalanx that other states didn't think possible.
            + They drilled their military almost 24/7(?)
            + Nowadays, scholars don't think this was the entire reason to go strict militarism, but oh well.

##### D) Resultant Configuration of Spartan Society

1. Spartiates
    * full Spartan citizens, dedicated to support the state, esp. in war
2. Perioeci/Perioecoi
    * dwellers-around the Spartans, locally independent but subservient to Sparta
        - craftsmen and traders
        - had local government, but whatever the Spartans needed, these Perioeci would do what was asked. This mainly consisted of mobilizing for war.
    * Xenophon told a story about his Spartan King. The Perioeci were a little cheezed that they sent more units or did more work. The Spartan King then noted that Sparta brought more actual soldiers (not cooks or blacksmiths) than the Perioeci did, and so did more of the fighting.
        - This story was reflected in 300, between King Leonidas and the Arcadians
3. Helots
    * Serfs who worked the land of the Spartiates
        - cf. neodamodeis
            + Raised the issue about how rebellious Helots were.
            + During the Peloponnesian war, when the Spartans weren't doing well, the Spartans enfranchised the Helots and allowed them to become (partial) citizenship and freedom from helotry.
                * Usually had to do with getting them to serve in the military
        - Theucydides story
            + Even while the Helots were Helots, they'd be brought along with their Spartan masters. The Helots would potentially outnumber the Spartans 7 to 1.
            + At one point (in the story), the Spartans said to the Helots "how many of you think you've served more bravely?" A few hundred stood up, and the Spartans slaughtered them.
                * Part of the story that the Spartans would **always** worry about the Helots revolting
                * So, they killed the boldest ones
                * Whether this story was true or not is an open issue.
    * Were allowed to own their land, and couldn't be sold away, but contributed produce to Sparta
    * Compeltely subservient to the Spartans
4. Hypomeiones
    * a shadowy group of Spartans who were not full citizens. Participated in their military like anyone else
        - "the people who were under"
    * e.g. Cinadon
5. Nothoi
    * bastard children that were not automatically Spartan citizens (and probably had no way of becoming such). Still, were considered Spartans
    * These people (and Hypomeiones) argued why they weren't considered Spartans. They felt it was unfair, and this was a common problem in Spartan history

Helots v. Perioeci

* No real way of knowing for sure how Spartans decided

#### II. GOVERNMENT

##### A) Kingship

Greek poleis had a "king magistrate". He didn't function like a king, but there was a position that was called "king." It was just a yearly magistracy.

Only Sparta had true kings. However, Sparta was not a monarch... because they had two of them.

1. Dual
    * Agiad and Eurypontid kings from early days
        - two branches of the kingship
        - don't know where they came from
            + speculation: two main chiefs from the first amalgamation of Sparta
            + Herodotus had a good story about the origins of their kingship
                * at one point, early in Spartan history, a king had two sons. The officials asked, "who was born first?" But they couldn't tell them apart. The mother didn't know either, but maybe she did and she just didn't want to say. So, they made them both kings.
                * After the proclaimed both kings, they saw that the mother favoured one slightly more, and made that king have the more honourable kingship
                * No scholars believe this
2. Function
    * Mainly military leaders but also had religious and judicial duties
3. Limitations
    * Had to negotiate with ephors and swear to uphold the constitution

##### B) Gerousia

1. Composition: 30 men over 60 years old, elected by the assembly. This included the two kings
    * In Sparta, the practical power was the senate/Gerousia
    * It's more like the assembly confirmed it (rubberstamped it)
2. Powers
    * Probouleutic
    * Judicial (murder/treason trials)
    * Legislative (regulated laws)
    * Veto: could overrule assembly, by shouts of yay or nay

##### C) Apella (Assembly)

Theoretically spreme but in practice a "rubber-stamp" body. The assembly is all the citizens together. Though Sparta was not democratic, it had some democratic aspects.

* In Sparta, it wasn't necessarily too different from Athens, which did give their citizens lots of power.

##### D) Ephors

1. Composition
    * highest magistrates, five elected to one-year terms from any Spartiate 30 years or older
2. Powers
    * Presided over gerousia and apella, oversaw agoge, restrained kings
        - Later on in Spartan history, often conflicted with kings
    * Some think the ephors were instituted, others think they gained power over time

> It occurred to me one day that Sparta, though among the most thinly populated of states, was evidently __the most powerful and most celebrated city in Greece__; and I fell to wondering how this could have happened. But when I considered the institutions of the Spartans, I wondered no longer. __Lycurgus__ who gave them the laws that they obey, and to which they owe their prosperity, I do regard with wonder; and I think that he reached the utmost limit of wisdom. For it was not by imitating other states, but __by devising a system utterly different from that of most others__, that he made his country pre-eminently prosperous.
> 
> Xenophon, *Constitution of the Spartans*, 1.1-2 (tr. Bowersock)

* It's very unlikely that a single man named Lycurgus came up with the system, but it demonstrates the habit of Greeks to identify one man who did everything
* Xenophon is very much "othering" the Spartans. Everything they did seemed to be completely different from that of other states


#### III. SPARTAN EDUCATION

##### A) Birth

Boys (girls too?) were inspected by officials, and if sickly or weak were exposed

* This was not actually an unusual practice among ancient Greeks. Ancient Greeks that didn't want a baby would expose them and leave them to die. Sometimes, people would take the child and raise them for slavery or some such.
    - In Ancient Greece, families that had 6 children might not be able to take a 7th, and so...
    - In Sparta, it was different because it was decided by a group of officials (the state)

##### B) At the age of 7

Boys were sent to live with age-mates and trained to be tough, resourceful, obedient motherfuckers

* Stories were that they weren't fed enough. So, they stole food (being resourceful).
    - They might have been given just a single cloak as clothing to survive by.
* Younger boys were overseen by older boys
    - No concern over bullying...
* Xenophon said that it was the duty of the adult to discipline any child, not just their own

##### C) Adulthood

1. Syssitia
    * At age 20, they would be elected to a Syssitia
        - people they would eat with and live with. To become a full Spartan citizen, needed to be elected to a Syssitia. If they were weak or not tough enough, could potentially not be elected
            + If not elected, that's it. Not a full Spartan citizen. Not a full-time soldier.
            + "Inferiors" Cinadon of Sparta
        - Tisamenos of Elis
            + Every Spartan soldier had land that was worked by Helots. From that land they would denote a certain amount of resources. If demands weren't met, the Spartan was eliminated from the Syssitia
            + It was very difficult to be a Spartan citizen. Even if the child would pass the agoge, they could be eliminated afterwards.
            + Tisamenos was from the Peloponnesus (not Sparta). He went to Delphi and was told he would have 5 victories. So, he decided to train as an athlete. He wins 4 wrestling matches but couldn't win a 5th. The Spartans figured that Tisamenos would win his 5th victory as a military general.
                * He wanted to be a full Spartan citizen, but was denied
                    + He was given citizenship
                * He then asked for his brother to be a Spartan citizen as well.
                    + He was also given citizenship. As per Herodotus, these were the only 2 non-Spartans given full citizenship
2. Marriage
    * At age 20, were encouraged to marry
    * Kind of weird... because they still lived with their Syssitia as this point.
3. Full citizenship at 30 and now a citizen would set up his household

##### D) Women

1. Education
    * Girls were educated similarly to boys, to be strong enough to bear strong citizen-soldiers
2. Status
    * Women had relatively high status
        - Had a lot of work to do within the household
    * More freedom, outspoken (e.g. Gorgo, wife of Leonidas)
        - Gorgo was told to have advised her king(s)
    * Married later, could inherit property

Only two types of people were given engravements on their gravestone: Soldiers who died in battle and women who died in childbirth.

* This indicates the status of women (higher than it was in other civilizations)