---
title:  "2017-05-01-CLAS201"
date:   2017-05-09 12:41:18 -0400
categories: CLAS201
layout: c_post
---
## CLAS201, 2017-05-01



### LAND AND SEA ###


#### I. EXTENT ####

Greeks did not call themselves "Greeks." They called themselves "Hellenes." Their country was called "Hellas," not Greece.

* In terms of topography, Greece was wherever Hellenes lived.

##### A) Greece Proper:

* Peloponnesus
	* Archaea, Arcadia, Messenia, Laconia
	* The area in southern Greece, south of Corinth. Notably, Sparta and Olympia can be found here
	* Messenia was conquered by Sparta, which enslaved the region
* Attica, Boeotia, Thessaly, Aetolia, Epirus, Macedonia
    - These were regions of Greece

##### B) Ionia, and the Aegean Islands

* Miletus, Ephesus, Halicarnassus (all cities)
* Samos, Naxos, Paros, Lesbos (cities Mytiline & Methymna), Delos (all islands)

##### C) Crete: Cnossus

##### D) Black Sea

* Sinope, Trapezus

##### E) Magna Craecia

* Taras (Tarentum), Neapolis, Syracuse
	* Syracuse was maybe the largest city state. It was compared to Athens in terms of size, miltary power, and cultural accomplishments

##### F) Around the Mediterranean

* Cyrene, Massilia, Emporion, Naucratis
	* Naucratis was a fully Greek city in the middle of Ancient Egypt. It was a trading city.


#### II. LAND

##### A) Topography was rugged. 75% of modern Greece is mountainous.

* Implications
	* poverty: Greeks tended to be economically poor since ancient economies were based mainly on agriculture
	* Polis Culture: Greek states were small and independent (at least, ideally) perhaps because the regions were divided into small geographical units (like islands).
	* Communication by land was difficult, so they turned to the Sea.

##### B) Agriculture and Livestock

* Mediterranean triad: grain (wheat, barley, oats), olives (esp. for oil), and wine
	* also ate meat (cattle, sheep, goats), fish, legumes, and nuts. New findings suggest Greeks ate more meat than first thought.
* Used horses for war and travel, and oxen for power


#### III. THE SEA

It's worth noting that the Greeks were one of the few powers to never really have an empire, with the exception of one maritime empire.

They liked the sea... a lot. If some Greeks were lost, but they found the sea, they'd be happy.



### HISTORICAL BACKGROUND ###


#### I. BRONZE AGE: 2000-1200 BC

Minoans were quite advanced and developed a Greek-speaking civilization of their own: the Mycenaeans
Mycenaeans started to build rich tombs and monuments around 1600 BC

* discovery dated to 1600 BC indicated a wealthy enough society to build these rich tombs.
* this also indicated some level of political cohesion, where the gov't would be able to collect people's wealth to fill these tombs

Mycenaeans main city was Mycenae, made of a bunch of city states with a well-fortified citadel in the centre.

**ca. 1600 BC Mycenaean collapse**

* controversial: tied with the fall of Atlantis (fictional?)

Note: Minoans spoke Greek, but were not Greek... They were highly influential on the Mycenaeans


#### II. Dark Age (1100-750BC)

Eventually, the people stopped writing and became illiterate. It took around a century for the Mycenaeans to collapse (1200-1100BC)

The economic, demographic, and cultural recovery began. It was heavily influenced by the East, which led to a different Greek civilization afterward.

Agriculture was more effective, and the Greeks began building large monuments again.

**Iron Age: 1050BC**

* Iron technologies came from Cyprus (likely)
* people did use iron beforehand, but mostly just for trinkets. This age came with metallurgy, where the Greeks learned to melt down the iron, carbonate it, etc...
* slightly contradictory, because this important technological advancement occurred during the (supposed) Dark Age

**Ionian Migration: 1050-950BC**

* During the Dark Age, there was lots of movement. After the Trojan War, peace eventually returned, and mainland Greeks migrated to the Aegean islands and the central coastal area of Asia Minor
    - This was somewhat documented by Thucydides
* Need more info...


#### III. Archaic Period 750-480BC)

Note, 750BC is not exact. By 750, the Greeks had already been thriving (much more than it did during the Dark Age, at least)

Civilization began to read and write again. Also began to build monuments and advanced cities again.

Around this time, the Greeks staved off Xerxes' Persian Invasion. This also marked a renaissance for the previously struggling civilization.

##### A) City-states arise (750-700BC)

##### B) Colonization

##### C) Age of Tyrants

* elite families are constantly competing for standing. At some point, they figured that if they can get the peoples' support, they can gain significant influence. From here, they came to power with the peoples' support.
* eventually, however, the people stopped supporting the tyrants, and democracy began. In some cases, aristocracies began.
* Ancient Greeks were (probably) much more democratic than we are right now.
