---
title:  "2017-05-08-CLAS201"
date:   2017-05-09 12:41:18 -0400
categories: CLAS201
layout: post
---
## CLAS201, 2017-05-08



### MYCENAEAN CIVILIZATION

**Introduction**

Minoan-influenced Greek kingdoms, but largely discontinuous with classical Greek culture

**Timeline**

1. ca. 2000 BC: "Greeks" enter Greece
2. 2000-1600 BC: Pre-Mycenaean
    * no monumental architecture, etc.
3. 1600-1400 BC: Early Mycenaean
    * some monuments were built, and rich tombs were amassed
4. 1400-1200 BC: Palace Period
    * Some felt that Mycenaeans just didn't build palaces. There are tombs (not very spectacular, though) but no palaces.
        - Either Mycenaeans just didn't build palaces, or just that nothing survived.
        - Architecture that had survived could have been built over by future civilizations, but there's little evidence for that as well.
        - Still, lots of art and treasures have survived
5. 1200*- Major upheaval
    * Lots of controversy over what exactly happened.
    * Much of the Mycenaean strucutres were destroyed. After this, the Mycenaean culture began to subside.
6. 1200-1050 BC: Sub-Myceaean
    * Lots of Mycenaean-style pottery survived, but it appears that the quality of these potteries deterioted over time. Art quality went down as well. Based on this, it's clear that there was a slow but noticeable decline after the Major Upheaval.

Note that 1700-1450 BC was considered the Neopalatial period of Minoan Civilization.

##### A) Classes

There's no doubt that the Minoans had classes in their social structure. However, there's just no physical evidence leftover from their times to declare it for certain.

1. Kings and Elite
    * Wanax
        - means King based on how he's mentioned in the Linear B tablets
        - Later Greeks have a word "anax" that stood for "High King"
        - Agamemnon was the high king, called "Wanax" or "Anax"
    * Lawagetas
        - A high-ranked military leader (or just a general status)
    * Basileus
        - A regular King, of later Greek times
        - Kings under Agamemnon were called "Basileus"
        - A person who is set over local areas within the Mycenaean kingdom. A mayor of the town or village
            + When Mycenaean civilization went down the tubes, it's very likely (and there's some evidence) that some of these smaller towns survived, and had their Basileus rule over them
2. Officials (the literate and others(?))
    * Bureacracy required some literate groups of people to command the masses
    * Low number of Officials. There appears to have been as few as 10 officials who wrote legislation
3. Artisans and "Free" Farmers
    * There were lots of craftsmen who made things in palaces. E.g. those who built chariot wheels and extracted olive oil
        - There were things being built outside as well, in towns and villages, but most of the construction work happened in palaces
    * "Free" Farmers weren't slaves. They weren't wealthy or well-off, but they were free.
4. Slaves
    * Some scholars suggest that Minoans didn't have slaves. They had a much more positive culture over other nations
        - Opinions have swayed, and it seems that an advanced civilization like the Minoans must have had (cheap) slaves to get all their work down
    * In the ancient world, virtually every advanced civilization had slaves as an integral part of their society. That's how shit got done

##### B) Architecture

Minoans didn't have fortifications. Their palaces weren't surrounded by walls. This suggested that they owned the sea (they were an island civilization, after all). If they owned the sea, they'd naturally not expect any invasions on land.

The Mycenaeans were big on walls and defense.

1. Fortifications
    * Cyclopean walls
        - The Cyclopes were giants among the ancient Greeks. Later Greeks thought these huge blocks of stone were moved by the Cyclopes, hence the name
2. Palaces
    * Megaron design with Minoan decoration
    * Mycenaean palaces were different in structure and outline from the Minoans'
        - However, the artistic decoration was adopted from the Minoans
        - The Megaron is the main room in the palace. It contains a large, ceremonial harp in the center with 4 pillars surrounding it. One side of the room would have a single chair (the King's throne).
            + Not found in Minoan palaces
    * Influenced by/based on Greek houses. The basic outline of the palace was based on what the Mycenaeans understood as a house. The palae was the King's house.
3. Graves: especially tholoi

##### C) Art

1. Frescoes depicting not just typical Minoan themes but violent scenes as well (hunting, war, etc)
2. Art in miniature
    * figurines, seals, inlaid daggers of silver and gold designs

##### D) Economy

1. Highly centralized: note Linear B tablets
2. Raid and Trade
> For in early times the Hellenes and the barbarians of the coast… were tempted to turn pirates… They would fall upon a town unprotected by walls, and consisting of a mere collection of villages and would plunder it; indeed, this came to be the main source of their livelihood, no disgrace being yet attached to such an achievement, but even some glory
>
> Thuc. 1.5.1

##### E) Religion

1. In art: Mycenaeans seem to have adopted ritual and symbols from the Minoans
2. Places of worship
    * Little evidence of natural places (caves, mountaintops, trees) like Minoans, but there are free standing shrines and cult statues
    * Mycenaeans liked coiled-snake statues (of clay, presumably) a lot. The symbolism of the snake is prominent in later Greek civilization
        - represented: healing and powers of the earth
3. Gods
    * As many male as female in Linear B tablets
        - It's very unlikely the Mycenaeans had a single mother goddess
        -
    * many names of the gods correspond to later Greek gods' names

##### F) Militarism

* artistic techniques and themes based closely on Minoans but with military themes
    - hunts, wars (against barbarians)
* walls and weapons were prominents
