---
title:  "2017-06-12-CLAS201"
date:   2017-06-12 12:41:18 -0400
categories: CLAS201
layout: post
---
## CLAS201, 2017-06-12



### LITERATURE AND PERFORMANCE

Literature in the ancient world was experienced mainly in performance, not reading

* There's some debate as to what percentage of Greeks in Ancient Athens/Greece were actually literate
* Similarly, tragic playwrights like Sophocles, Eurypides, were experienced in the Theatre (of Dionysus, perhaps)


#### I. EPIC POETRY

Homer, Hesiod, Homeric Hymns

##### A) Oral Development

1. *Iliad* and *Odyssey* were written down after centuries of oral tradition
    * *Iliad*, about Achilles, his anger towards King Agamemnon, and the Trojan War
    * *Odyssey*, ...
2. Hesiod wrote the *Theogony*, regarding the creation of the world
3. **Epic** because it was written in an epic meter: Dactylic hexameter
4. Length of *Iliad* and *Odyssey* suggests they were not fully formed until written down
    * Since these epics had accurate references to things in the Bronze Age, they had to have originated from the Bronze Age. They were passed down orally through the Dark Age, and were finally written down later
    * Repetitive nature suggests oral development
        - All these heroes have long names and epithets. These standard, repeated epithets follow the rhythmic requirements for the dactylic meter.
        - These stock phrases that you can fall back on allows you to stick with the meter while also developing what you'll say next
            + This suggests spontaneous oral composition
    * These two epics were quite long, so it must have been only after writing came to the Greeks that writers could piece these stories into one single epic.
        - However, we have modern day examples of oral poets (from Yugoslavia) who can compose long, complex poems solely in their heads
        - So, it's tough to say how likely it was that the *Iliad* and the *Odyssey* was composed in pieces
5. Homeric hymns came from a time much later than Homer, but followed under his influences (and the epic meter)

##### B) Performance

1. Original Context
    * banquets of the elite
        - in the Dark Age, the elite would hold a banquet for the people. Lots of food to eat and wine to drink
        - then, the elite(s) would hire a bard to sing the songs of the Trojan War, the Odyssey, etc
2. Later Contexts
    * rhapsodic performances
        - these performers would memorize these epics and hymns and have a competition
            + agonistic
                * work hard to win a competition. Everything was competitive
                * best rhapso, best poet, etc.


#### II. LYRIC POETRY (ca. 650-450BC)

##### A) Form: Great Variety

* Different meters (elegiac & iambic) and musical accompaniments (lyre, oboe, harp)
* Choral and monodic (solo musician)
* Topics
    - Love affairs, war, politics, wedding songs, death, athletic victories
    - Lots of complaints about common people crudely invading the realms of the elite
        + these poems would be written by or performed for elites, so this makes sense
    - NB. often very personal

##### B) Performance

1. Symposia
    * Elite drinking parties
    * eg. Theognis
        - sounds like a grumpy idiot
        - talks about the "good old days" where everyone knew their place, and how it has all gone to shit
2. Public
    * partheneia, celebrating young women coming of age
        - could be wedding songs as well
        - maybe sung at festivals held in city states
    * epinician odes
        - a victory song
        - eg. Pindar
            + a great person wins an event at the games, and someone like Pindar would write a victory ode to this person
            + this song may possibly be sung at the games themselves, after Pindar had quickly put a song together for you
            + more commonly sung when the person arrives back home, because the person had brought glory to his city state


#### III. THEATRE: TRAGEDY AND COMEDY

##### A) Development

From the dithyramb (choral hymn to Dionysus) under Pisistratus

* The dithyramb would have fell under the category of lyric poetry
    - sung at the festival of Dionysus, about the great deeds of Dionysus
    - a chorus of maybe 50 men sang the dithyramb
        + led by a choragus, who would step out, be an individual, and address the chorus

##### B) Important Aspects of Theatre

1. Religious setting
    * part of festivals to Dionysus
        - Dionysia; things that had to do with Dionysus
        - A greater Dionysia was called the City Dionysia. A big festival that was highly religious
            + The day before the festival began, there'd be a procession of the image of Dionysus (eg. his statue)
            + They'd bring his image out and back into the city, as a way of welcoming him back to the city
            + The first day, there'd be a big parade (with large phalluses...)
                * Feasts and wine
                * Choral arrangements
                * Dithyrambs performed by choruses of 50 men
                    - these performances were very competitive
            + The second day, there would be 5 separate comedies
            + The third and fourth/fifth day, there'd be tragedies and a satyr play
                * these tragedies would be terribly depressing
                    - catharsis of pity and fear
                * these satyr plays much more lively and upbeat. Farcical and satirical 
                    - makes a mockery of some Greek myth
2. Political Significance
    * presided over by the (Eponymous) Archon
        - most prominent political position
        - there was an Archon called the Basileus (the King Archon), who resided over religious things, while the Eponymous Archon resided over political things
        - chose the playwrights to present their 3 tragedies
    * Theoric fund
        - some sources say Pericles brought this in during his radical democratic revolution
            + though some disagree
        - state money given to people to pay for their entrance into their theatrical performance
            + the state felt that both the tragic and comedic performances were for the educaiton of the people
            + the tragic playwrights were called dedascoloids (teachers)
            + people needed to be sophisticated thinkers
                * rule and be ruled in turn; everyone should be involved in politics, which required sopĥisticated thinking
    * Political Issues "discussed"
        - plays didn't discuss contemporary (for the time) political issues, but rather mythical themes
            + still, these mythical themes always indirectly addressed political issues
        - __Tragedy__
            + Aeschylus' *Eumenides* (ca. 460 BC)
                * this play is about the Areopagus, and a famous hero who had to avenge his father's death. However, his father's killer was his mother, and Apollo tells him that he must kill his mother regardless.
                * There is a trial for whether he is guilty or not, and the Areopagus declares that his responsibilities are to his father, not his mother, hence freeing him
                * __Significance__: Around 460 BC, Pericles transformed the Areopagus by taking most of their powers away
                    - Just when people were struggling with this political reformation (of the Areopagus), this play showed it still had the right to try murders
                    - This play seems to try to tell people that the Areopagus is still a very important institution
                * Also recall that Ephialtes, Pericle's partner, was assassinated for instituting this deformation of the Areopagus
                * Aeschylus comes into this controversy and delivers a play regarding the political implications
            + Sophocles' *Antigone*
                * This play was put on when Athens was working on their traditional laws
                * __Question__: How much can you change the traditional laws and still be legitimate, because the gods have established what's right and wrong?
                    - Laws were based on morals established by the gods. If you start changing these laws, when do you go too far?
                * *Antigone* is about a woman who stands up and does what the gods have decreed at the cost of rejecting her king/the law.
                    - Clear political implications here

        - __Comedy__
            + mostly set in contemporary Athens
            + political leaders directly and explicitly lampooned
            + eg. Cleon and Theramenes
                * Aristophanes featured Cleon quite prominently, and presented him as an idiot.
                * Theramenes was another well-known political figure, and was presented as a simpering fool
            + consider this as precedence for what modern day comedians are doing when they satirize and mock political figures

##### C) The Plays

1. Tragedy
    * Mostly mythical themes with contemporary relevance
        - cf. *Sack of Miletus* by Phyrnicus (492 BC)
            + about how the Persians destroyed Miletus
                * this upset the audiences, and Phyrnicus was fined
        - cf. *Persians* by Aeschylus (472 BC)
            + related to contemporary issues, and how the Persians lost their final war that dashed their hopes of conquering Greece
2. Comedy
    * Setting
        - contemporary Athens
            + eg. *Lysistrata*
                * the sex strike of women in Athens and Sparta
            + eg. *Clouds*
                * highlights Socrates as a dipstick(?) in the clouds
                * in all philosophical texts, Socrates is wise and humble. Slightly goofy, but profoundly wise
                    - yet, Aristophanes portrays him as bizarre, and shows Socrates teaching unjust/strange arguments to win a day in court
                * did not directly address political issues, but lampoons contemporary currents.
                    - Socrates is the embodiment of all new thinkers in philosophy, but a lot of people didnèt like that. So, it makes sense to have this sort of comedy against Socrates
            + eg. *Frogs*
                * Aristophanes pokes fun at the chorus, portraying them as frogs
                * Just recently (to *Frogs*), both Sophocles and Aeschylus had died
                    - People worried, now that the good playwrights/poets had died
                    - They wanted one of their poets back, and so Dionysus is comissioned to go down to the Underworld to fetch one of the dead playwrights
                    - The frogs sit by the river Styx, and Dionysus is portrayed very satirically
    * Playwrights
        - Aristophanes (450-385 BC)
            + around 11 of his plays have survived
        - Menander (344-292 BC)
            + small amount of his plays