---
title:  "2017-05-24-CLAS201"
date:   2017-05-24 12:41:18 -0400
categories: CLAS201
layout: post
---
## CLAS201, 2017-05-24



### WAR AND PEACE

* Greeks did have archers and skirmishers, but didn't really admire soldiers who shot from afar.
    - The truly courageous and noble was one who stood face-to-face against the enemy
    - Portraying the Persians as archers signified what the Greeks felt about them, and how they "other'd" their enemies


#### Introduction

1. Psychologically
    * the Greeks viewed war as an integral part of life
        - e.g. Homer's *Iliad*
            + Story of war, death, and destruction (Trojan War)
            + The Greeks fought to rescue(?) Helen from Troy
        - e.g. Athena, goddess of wisdom, civilization, and war
            + seems like war is a natrual state of being. Today, civilizations at war seems uncomfortable
            + For the Greeks, the two are united
    * Homer (in *Iliad* seems to realize war is evil, because he gives lovely expositions of people who died in war (how he grew up, how he lived, how he'll be missed, etc.)
        - But how Homer portrays battles indicates he also things war is noble and glorious
        - In truth, Homer probably viewed war as "it just is." Sometimes it's bad, other times good.
    * Athena is probably the most admired Greek god(dess). She seems to be virtually always positively portrayed
        - She gave wisdom and skill, which allowed people to live in civilized manner in Greek city state(s)
        - She upheld Greek civilization
        - But, then, she was also the goddess of war. Contemporary society thinks war is the antithesis to civilization.
            + The Greeks felt that if you were successful in war, your civilization will be successful. Moreover, your civilization can also grow upon conquering other lands in war.
2. Practically speaking, the Greeks did seem to be always at war
    * it was a constant given the fierce independence of poleis and the shortage of physical resources
        - this led to lots of border wars
        - moreover, the Greeks felt the only way to have peace war to have a dominating empire with enough power to control others
    * the natrual state of "non-peace" is a little depressing, but ...


#### I. INFANTRY

##### A) Homeric Warfare

1. Chariots
    * We know stories come from the bronze age
    * Homer talked about chariots, and scholars of recent times think that Homer didn't really get the chariots thing right
        - Homer didn't have chariot cores lined up against each other, which was how they were typically used in ancient times
            + He had them in battles, but only used to convey/rush soldiers into the battle
            + So, scholars think the Greeks of Homer's day had forgotten how chariots were used
        - Still, upon studying Mycenaeans more deeply, it's unlikely they used chariot cores in actual battles (as Middle Eastern civilizations did).
            + Mycenaeans didn't have smooth lands to use chariots in
            + Still, literature from the times did talk about some chariots, but it probably only represented status (for Kings etc.), rather than war units.
                * Kings rode in chariots to indicate high status to other civilizations
2. Individual Combat v. Serried Ranks
    * Late Dark Age, early Archaic Age
        - Individual combat was prominant (could see this in the movie Troy). Soldiers like Ajax were dominant in these single combats
            + this predated the hoplite phalanx
    * Later on, Greeks fought tightly packed. So close that their helmet feathers ruffled each other
        - Not a hoplite phalanx, yet, but a closely packed phalanx

##### B) Hoplite "Revolution"

1. Origins
    * Some brilliant Greek came up with the idea of a hoplite shield
        - These shields requisited another soldier to protect his adjacent soldier's right-hand side
        - This revolutionzed the way of fighting
            + Now, scholars have swung to the idea that the Dark Age and early Archaic Age did in fact fight closely idea. The hoplite shield only improved/refined their combat (rather significantly, no less)
    * Recall the Spartans lost rather badly to the Argos in the Battle of Hysiae
        - This loss was attributed to the Argos developing the hoplite phalanx shield
        - Scholars seemed to pinpoint the hoplite revolution to 669 BC, during the Battle of Hysiae
            + Still, there's some skepticism because the apparent developer, Pheidon II, was a sketchy character
            + With that said, sometimes stories become popular because they sound nice, not because they made complete sense or because they had distinct evidence
2. Nature
    * Panoply
        - Hoplon shield, long spear, short sword(?), helmet, breastplate, greaves
            + it seems later on, the Greeks went to a heavy linen rather than a breastplate. They had a shield, so why bother with a breastplate?
            + Still, in Ancient Greece art, Greeks were completely clothed (so as to "other" the enemy, who was usually portrayed as a savage)
    * Tactics
        - Pushing and stabbing in formation until one side breaks ranks
        - cf. highly trained Spartans
            * Spartans, since they trained 24/7, had all kinds of different tactics that other Greeks couldn't hope to develop
            * Spartan mothers told their soldiers "with it or on it." Referring to never running away (dropping your shield and running)
3. "Ritualized" warfare
    * Position of honour, victor sets up *trope*, truce with the defeated to collect bodies of fallen comrades
        - The winning side is the one left standing on the field
            + This leads to some confusion...
            + The winner sets up a trope (a "turning"). When you make your enemy turn around and run, that is a "turning." And you set up a monument for the fact that you trope'd them.
                * this usually involves the arms of the loser (actual delimbed arms?)
    * Right wing was position of greatest importance
    * Left wing was position of second greatest importance
    * Centers are the people in between
    * The Greeks didn't arrange themselves based on skill or possibility of success, but rather by honour and status/respect.

##### C) Cracks in the Phalanx

1. The rise of the peltast
    * Iphicrates and the Battle of Lechaeum (390 BC)
        - The Phreciens wore light armour, and was quick. This made them effective in certain situations
        - After the Peloponnesian War, everyone were allies of the Spartans. After a while, people became upset with the Spartans and defied them. In the 390s BC, Athens and Thebes fought against Sparta
            + Most of this fighting took place around Corinth
            + The Spartans controlled the port of Lechaeum
            + Her enemies controlled Sparta(?)
            + Unfortunately for the Spartans, it was the time of festivals, and the Amyclaeans went home
        - Iphicrates took some Greeks and started pelting the Spartans with javelins.
            + Just a handful of the 100s returned home, and the Spartans realized their hoplites were failing
                * Greeks just began hiring Phreciens to throw javelins and started defeating Spartans
                * Sending cowardly peltasts after our noble soldiers... but it worked, and the ritualized aspect of warfare was starting to break down
2. Theban innovations (370s and 360s BC)
    * From 371 to 362 BC, the Thebans were the most dominant state in Boetia.
        - This was due to a number of brilliant leaders (militarily)
    * Battle of Leutra (371 BC)
        - Thebans loaded up the left side with the best soldiers
            + 50 deep against the Spartans
                * the Spartans had their most honourable troops on their right side. This was countered by 50 deep of the Thebans' best soldiers. The Thebans fought to win, not follow conventions
                * Moreover, the Thebans angled their front so that their right side (their weaker soldiers) were a bit behind.
            + The Thebans crushed the Spartiates, who were found on the right side of their phalanx.
            + It was a daring tactic (to defy conventions), but it worked
                * Good example of how civilizations tend to limit themselves in war.
                * Their rituals prevented them from fighting at maximum effectiveness. The Thebans essentially rejected that to achieve victory
    * Sacred Band: new motivation and training
        - Thebans had 300 troops who were highly motivated due to their pairings with their higher-age mentors
            + these troops' relationships were homosexual, and inspired higher devotion

##### D) Macedonian Phalanx

1. Origins: Philip II (359 BC)
    * This is during the Greeks' fighting each other all over the place
    * In 359 BC, Philip II comes to the throne
        - For two years, Philip lived among the Thebans and their military innovations as a hostage
            + note, hostages weren't treated poorly then. He was a hostage based on the Thebans' requesting hostages upon their victories. In reparation, the defeated would send hostages
2. Panoply: helmet, small shield, and sarissa (18 ft. pike).
    * The sarissa was a highly long-range weapon. This led to different formations, hence the new Macedonian Phalanx, where up to six rows of soldiers had their spears pointed in the front.
3. Tactics: phalanx with calvary
    * Philip II developed a crack-core of calvary. The right side of the phalanx would have a troup of calvary that awaits any break in opponent phalanxes.
    * The calvary would smash the opponent phalanx further, and this was an entirely new way of fighting and was very effective
        - The question: was this really a better way?
            + This was more technologically advanced, but there's no realy way of saying it was better than the traditional hoplite phalanx
    * This tactic really helped suplant the Greek hoplite warriors
        - It didn't replace that tactic completely, but was more effective
4. Dominant until it met the Roman manipular legion in the Helennistic period
    * Philip II used it, and his son Alexander the Great used it
    * cf. Pyrrhus of Epirus (280-275 BC)
        - "Pyrrhic victory": a victory with catastrophic losses
        - When the Greeks met the Romans, they lost so much of their troops, but was still somewhat successful. Still, the Romans were so relentless that any Greek victory would be met by large losses.
    * The manipular legion was more flexible, especially in tough terrains
        - The Romans left more space in their phalanx


#### II. NAVY

Based on the trireme

##### A) Origins

Developed in Egypt of Phoenicia (Corinth?) in 6th century BC.

##### B) Nature

The Greek navy consisted of (mostly) triremes.

* Long and narrow, made for ramming
* 170 rowers in three banks
    - Large number of rowers meant the trireme was effective at turning
    - note, triremes had sails, but they were only used to get to battles, and were removed during them
* few marines (10)
* archers (4)

##### C) Naval Tactics

* Periplous
    - Lining the perimeter like a phalanx
    - Ships would be lined next to each other, separated by enough space for oars to not crash into each other
* Diekplous
* Forming a circle

The last battle of the Peloponnesian War

...

General Conan

* Tried to war the other Athenians (who didn't listen)
* Sailed out with some ships, and managed to go around the Spartans towards their shore, and stole the Spartans' sails and sailed off to Cyprus

#### III. Diplomacy and Peace

##### A) Alliances

1. Peloponnesian League (ca. 550-366 BC)
    * Lead by the Spartans
2. Delian League (ca. 477-404 BC)
    * The Athenians
3. Various *Koina*, esp. in Hellenistic era (Aetolian, Achaean)
    * These Koina were originally ethnic-based
    * Once the Greek kingdoms were established, it was difficult for individual Greek cities to stand alone.
        - After 323 BC, the Koina became powerful and important, so as to defend themselves against the threatening Greek kingdoms

##### B) Diplomacy

1. Ambassadors were sacrosant
    * These ambassadors were protected by the gods, and not to be touched
    * NB. Sparta and Athens mad disrespect against Persian ambassadors (490 BC)
2. Proxenia (and Proxenos)
    * originating from "Xenos", ambassadors protected by Zeus
    * Citizen representative of a foreign power.
    * e.g. Spartans want their interests to be upheld in other states (like Embassies would do)
        - Spartans wouldn't send an ambassador to Athens just to argue their case. They'd have someone permanently in Athens looking after Spartan interested. These individuals would be called Proxenos
            + e.g. Cimon for Sparta
            + When ambassadors from Sparta came to Athens, they'd stay with Cimon and discuss the politics of the situation
            + Naturally, these Proxenoi are susceptible to ire from the state they live in. This meant they garnered some prestige and status.

##### C) Peace Treaties

1. Specific peace treaties
    * e.g. Thirty-year peace between Athens and Sparta (446-431 BC. Note the math).
2. General/Common peace
    * e.g. King's Peace, 387 BC
        - Agreed to by most of the Greek city states
        - Basically, everybody was allied with Sparta after the Peloponnesian War (404 BC). Thebes and Corinth then broke away, and started the Corinthian War (Thebes, Corinth, Athens against Sparta)
            * This war dragged on for a while, and when the states were ready for peace, they gathered in Persia.
            * At this point, it was determined that the Greek states would be independent, and Persia oversaw the states that broke the peace.
        - Didn't last very long.
