---
title:  "2017-05-29-CLAS201"
date:   2017-05-29 12:41:18 -0400
categories: CLAS201
layout: post
---
## CLAS201, 2017-05-29

Law and economy will be on the midterm, but not covered in class. Read the chapters in the text.

* From chapters in the textbook: **Law and Justice**, and **Economy**


### ANCIENT GREEK RELIGION

Greeks didn't really have a word for religion (Robert Garland). They had a word for "fear of (the) god(s)", but that's not really the same thing.


#### I. THE GODS

Greeks were influenced by Homer and Hesiod in terms of the way they thought about the gods. They sort of had a bible, but it didn't have the authority as you'd expect.

##### A) Polytheistic

1. Major gods embodied natural and cultural realities
    * e.g. Zeus (sky), Poseidon (sea), Demeter (fertility), Aphrodite (fertility), Athena (civilization, war), Hephaestus (fire, craftsmenship)
2. Minor gods inhabited every tree, spring, and river
    * 3000 or so

##### B) Powerful and Glorious

##### C) Anthropomorphic

With foibles and pettiness

* e.g. Zeus' infidelities, Hera's suspicions and shrewishness, the violence of Mars (Ares?)

##### D) Immortality

This is the highest distinction between gods and humans

* Note the indifference of the gods to human suffering in *Iliad*
* "Know thyself"
    - Not meaning "to understand own abilities and own foibles"
    - Know that you are mortal, and that you will die, and live accordingly

##### E) Scepticism About the Gods

1. Critiques of anthropomorphicness of gods
    * Xenophanes (b. 570 BC): "One god is greatest among gods and men, but his appearance and thought are nothing like ours."
        - May have been monotheistic
    * Plato would exclude poets from his ideal city because of their immoral view of the gods
        - Felt that these poets filled peoples' minds with nonsense about how bad the gods were
    * Nevertheless, these people (any people who criticised gods) are not atheists.
        - Atheism was "a step too far" back then
2. Agnosticism
    * The sophists questioned traditional views
        - e.g. Protagoras said, "Man is the measure of all things. ... Concerning the gods, I have no means of knowing whether they exist or not or of what sort they may be. Many things prevent knowledge including the obscurity of the subject and the brevity of human life."
            * This quote suggests a level of agnosticism, but he questions how we could know anything about them
            * Though he does mention that they do exist
3. Atheism was rare, but
    * Diagoras of Melos
        - was a defiant atheist
        - Story of the storm: as ships traveled through a storm, sailors believed the gods were targeting Diagoras
    * Epicureans
        - felt that there was no eternal soul and no intervention by the gods
            * they felt that it was impossible for the gods to intervene with humans' actions
            * soul was made up of tiny atoms (as opposed to big ones...). When you die, your body dissolves quickly, but the soul dissolves slower
        - practical atheists


#### II. PRACTICE OF RELIGION

##### A) In the Household

1. Zeus Ktesios (of property)
    * a two-handed jar. Filled with food to garner protection
2. Zeus Herkeios (of the fence/wall)
    * protects the house from bad things. Pray to this little manifestation of Zeus
        * Once a year, a festival for this god
    * Instead of "Where do you live?" you ask, "Where's your Zeus Herkeios?"
3. Apollo Agyieus (of the street/road)
    * manifestation of Apollo
    * turns evil things away from your home. He watches from within but also around
4. Hestia (the hearth)

##### B) In the Village/Neighbourhood (deme)

1. Example of deme of Erchia
    * 25 festival days (total of 59 animals sacrificed)
        - to six Apollos
        - seven Zeuses
        - and heroes (three unique to Erchia)
2. Especially agricultural festivals
    * tributes to Demeter (Thesmophoria, secret rites for woman only)
    * and Dionysus (grape festivals, Dionysia with revelling and dramas)

##### C) State level

1. State religion reflects household and deme religion
    * e.g. Hestia altar at Prytaneion Zeus Herkeios altar on acropolis
    * e.g. Greater Dionysia, all served by state-sponsored priesthoods (incl. 40 for women)
2. Eleusinian mysteries
    * for those who choose to be initiated; open to any Greeks; for a happy afterlife
    * to Demeter, but not to do with the fertility of the soil, but rather having a successful afterlife.
    * In most cases, to fully participate in a festival, you had to be a full citizen of the state it's held in, or at least had to live there.
        - The Elusinian mysteries were open to any Greek
    * Nobody knows what kind of revelation was found at the end
        - But, supposedly, it changes peoples' lives, because now they know they'll have a succesful afterlife.
    * "Happy is the one of mortals on earth who has seen these things. But those who are uninitiated into the holy rites and have no part never are destined to a similar joy when they are dead in the gloomy realm below."
        - Homeric Hymn to Demeter

##### D) Pan-Hellenic Religious Festivals

1. Oracle of Delphi
    * consulted by individuals and states
    * cf. Dodona
2. Olympian Games to Zeus and Pelops
    * cf. Also Isthmian (Poseidon), Pythian (Apollo), and Nemean (Zeus) games 