---
title:  "2017-05-15-CLAS201"
date:   2017-05-15 12:41:18 -0400
categories: CLAS201
layout: post
---
## CLAS201, 2017-05-15



### Athenian Democracy


#### I. CHARACTERISTICS

##### A) Direct (not Reprsentative)

1. Assembly
    * Discussed and decided all legislation
        - Was supreme: had a lot of power and freedom to do whatever they wanted
        - Contrast with Sparta's Apella and Roman assemblies
    * At the end of the discussion, all the citizens voted, **directly**, for the decision they were going to make
        - Not too many citizens actually spoke, but they could.
    * Today, we don't have direct democracy
2. Courts
    * Very large juries (as high as 1501) chosen by sortition suggested the whole *demos* & prevented bribery
        - Required a majority vote
    * Major trials (like treason) were held in Assembly itself
3. Magistrates
    * Chosen by sortition (lottery) to rule and be ruled in turn


#### II. DEVELOPMENT

##### A) Solon (594 BC), a mediator

1. Eliminated Debt Slavery and redistributed land
    * Farmers, for example, need to borrow resources when their crops weren't growing just so they could feed themselves.
        - This debt led to many citizen families being sold into slavery
        - Solon eliminated this
    * The elite were dominating the land that was available
        - There was a class of people who had to give a portion of their produce/land to the elite. Solon also eliminated this.
            + Origins of this were unknown
    * Still, the common citizens wanted Solon to redistribute all the land, which he couldn't do.
        * Also, this reduced the income of some elites, so they weren't happy as well.
2. Set up property classes (though only top two could stand for major magistracies)
    * Solon was a mediator, not a democrat. As such, he didn't really have any regard for the status of commoners and elites.
3. Established Boule (cf. Areopagus) to organize business of the Assembly
    * Boule just means "council"
        - Solon regulated/set the powers of the council/assembly.
            + He declared what they could or could not do.
        - WHen the assembly decided on something, the Boule ensured it would be followed through.
    * Areopagus meant the council that met on the hill of Ares (the traditional council)
    * Issues: the people didn't want the council to make all the decisions. Solon argued that juries of common people needed to make decision as well
        * If a common person was dragged to court in front of the Areopagus, and is declared guilty, he could appeal with the jury
            - Some scholars think that's all the jury was (an appeal court)
            - Others believe the juries actually tried their own legal cases
4. Set up jury courts (appellate) open to all citizens
5. Regulated Assembly to vote for war/peace, choose archons

##### B) Cleisthenes (508 BC)

Not everyone liked Solon. There was some social tension at the time of Solon.

In 510 BC, the people were pissed off with the tyrants and kicked them out.

Some Greek elites who were previously exiled returned and argued for aristocracy. In some Greek states, when they eliminated the tyrants, they would go back to an aristocracy. In Athens, however, they went to a democracy, as per Cleisthenes

The Spartans came and helped fight for aristocracy. However, the common people rose up and drove the Spartans out, allowing Cleisthenes (and democracy) to come to power. He brought lots of reforms:

1. Tribal system
    * Athenian society had elites and commoners, traditionally, but also 4 tribes.
        - These were ancient divisions, housing both elites and commoners. However, elites probably dominated. These tribes were mostly geographically divided
    * 10 new tribes which disrupted traditional elite power structures
        - Basic unit was a **deme**, a neighbourhood of Athens or a village in the countryside (150 in total)
            + These demes were arranged into 30 trittyes (thirtieths) of roughly equal size
            + These trittyes were assigned to three zones depending on the geographic
                * The coast
                * The city
                * The inland
            + One from each zone was assigned to each of the new tribes
    * This tribal system replaced the traditional four-tribe system
2. Deme structure: training ground for politics, demotic naming, citizenship recognition
    * People were normally named after their fathers. After Cleisthenes, they identified themselves by their demes
        - The old way was too engrained, so this new demotic naming didn't really catch on.
3. New Boule of 500
    * Seems like a reworking of Solon's council, but more demographic
    * 50 formed a prytany at all times (10 a year)
        - If there's not someone ready/available, then the Areopagus would take over the case.
    * Responsibilities included foreign affairs, finances, and probouleumata
        - probouleumata refered to the topics and decisions that were to be discussed in (and on behalf of or for the) the assembly
4. Assembly (supreme)
5. Ostracism
    * There's no real evidence that any ostracism occured until the 480 BCs
    * to thwart a potential tyrant; as pressure valve for inter-elite competition
        - In the spring, the assembly would vote on whether they want an ostracism. People would vote one way or the other.
            + Theoretically, if people felt that there was too much tension, or an elite was getting too excited, then they would vote for an ostracism
            + One of the ostracons would have a person's name engraved on it. This person, upon voted on, would have to leave Athens for 10 or so years. This allowed Athens to eliminate potentially dangerous shit.
    * This demonstrated the power of the democracy over the elite

##### C) Generalship (Strategoi) in 501 BC

Typically, a magistrate led the military. Every year, 10 general were elected, and, around 490 BC (Battle of Marathon), the polomarcs became ceremonious positions. As democracy grew, these generals started leading the military.

Even though the archons were higher level, the generalship was more important and powerful. These generals needed to be skilled and proven. The generalship became the most important magistracy

Generals were consistently re-elected. Some generals included:

* Cimon (470s and 460s BC)
    - Very skilled war general. Held a generalship position for many years
    - However, was not great politically, and was exiled
* Pericles (450s, 440s, and 430s BC)
    - Generalship was a bit iffy, but was very political. Was very influential in the assembly.

##### D) Diminishing of Areopagus

Areopagus was still the most prestigious government body. However, people (like Pericles) wanted to make democracy more radical. As such, they attacked the Areopagus

* In 487, they began electing the archons by sortition. This led to a loss of prestige
* Reforms of Ephialtes (462)
    - Many powers taken away from Areopagus
    - Was this a true democracy now? There wasn't a grand body to make the decisions, and the body was elected by, essentially, the people (through democracy)
        + The Areopagus was used as a last decider for certain pieces of law. This power was strigged from them
        + The judicious power was also taken, and given to the boule
    - Murder and maim trials were still held by the Areopagus
    - Ephialtes was assassinated shortly after.
        + Pericles took over as the radical democrat

##### E) Pericles

1. Archonship opened to everyone (though technically not to thetes)
2. Pay for service (jury duty, Boule, then assembly attendance)
    * Poorer commons who couldn't afford to not work for a day were now paid for jury duty
    * Boule members who were on duty 24/7 were paid
    * Again, workers couldn't take a day off work to attend assembly. This encouraged people to contribute their voice at no consequence
        - This was kind of scandalous at first, but serves to demonstrate how radical the democracy was.

##### F) After 403 BC

After the Peloponnesian War, the Athenians weren't doing well. The radical democracy was blamed for their issues, and intellectuals like Isocrates and Plato critized it.

In 411 BC, the assembly voted itself (the democracy) out of exisence. They returned to an aristocracy, but it was rather unsuccessful (understatement?), and so Athens returned to a democracy.

At the end of the war, the Spartans set up an aristocrat council of 30. This council was so evil and destructive, that it convinced the Athenians to avoid aristocracy completely. Still, it was questioned by intellectuals named above.

This democracy was not questioned until the Macedonians took over.