CS350, 2017-05-09


#### Some History

EXEC I
1962 - UNIVAC 1107

* A batch processor with multiprogramming
	* Automatically loads the next job upon completion of another
	* Do not wait (i.e. let CPU idle) for I/O to complete. Save A's state, start running B's I/O
	* 288 KB of memory


#### Implementing Concurrent Threads

Options

1. Multiple processors, multiple cores, hardware multithreading per core
    * P processors, C cores per processor, M multithreading degree(s) per core
        * ==> P\*C\*M threads can execute *simultaneously*
    * From an operating systems perspective, option 1 is boring.
2. Timesharing
    * Multiple threads take turns on the same hardware
    * Rapidly switch from thread to thread so that all can make progress

In practice, both techniques can be/are combined

Notes

* Threads don't always terminate.
    - e.g. repeating a movie over and over will cause these threads to keep running. Theoretically this will hijack your processing power
    - Through timesharing, other threads can have an opportunity to run

##### Timesharing and Context Switches

When timesharing, the switch from one thread to another is called a *context switch*
What happens during a context switch?

* Decide which thread will run next (scheduling)
* Save register contents of current thread
* Load register contents of next thread 

Thread context must be saved/restored carefully, since thread execution continuously changes the context

* Sometimes, threads have higher priority. Naturally, there should be some way to determine which thread(s) require more processing time.
    - OS/161 is round robin (no priority)

##### Context Switch on the MIPS

Saving registers of old thread
```
/* See kern/arch/mips/thread/switch.S */

switchframe_switch:
    ; a0: address of switchframe pointer of old thread
    ; a1: address of switchframe pointer of new thread

    ; Allocate stack spac efor saving 10 registers
    addi sp, sp, -40
    sw ra, 36(sp)
    sw gp, 32(sp)
    sw s8, 28(sp)
    sw s6, 00(sp)
    sw s5, 00(sp)
    sw s4, 00(sp)
    sw s3, 00(sp)
    sw s2, 00(sp)
    sw s1, 00(sp)
    sw s0, 00(sp) ; these are the callee-save registers
``` 

Loading registers of new thread
```
; Let the new stack pointer from the new thread

lw sp, 0(a1)
nop ; delay slot for load

; Now, restore registers
lw ...
lw ...
.
.
.
nop ; delay slot for load

j ra ; return. There is a delay slot after jumps
addi sp, sp, 40 ; in delay slot
.end swithframe_switch
```

##### What Causes Context Switches?

1. running thread calls `thread_yield`
    * the current thread is voluntarily giving up the CPU and letting another thread go
2. running thread calls `thread_exit`
    * the current thread is gone and deleted from the system. Thus, need a new thread to run
3. running thread *blocks*, via a call to `wchan_sleep`
    * more on this later ...
    * e.g. hardware like printers require an innate delay/sleep between print processes. If a thread goes to sleep while waiting for resources, we can switch to another thread to run
4. running thread is *preempted*
    * the current thread involuntarily stop running

##### ...

##### Preemption

* WIthout preemption, a running thread could potentially run forever, without yielding/blocking/exiting
    * the OS can't just stop it for no reason
    * This is done using hardware interrupts (like key-presses) 
* Preemption means forcing a running thread to stop running, so that another thread can have a chance
* When an interrupt occurs, the hardware automatically transfers control to a fixed location in memory
    * When an interrupt is received, the CPU keeps the address of a *trap frame*. The CPU will immediately execute the code at the trap frame. This code will save the context of the thread that is to be interrupted
    * Since we're interrupting, the thread could have been executing anything. Thus, we have to save everything (not just callee-save registers).
        - e.g. registers like hi or lo
* At that memory location, the thread library places a procedure called an interrupt handler
* The interrupt handler normally:
    1. create a trap frame to record thread context at the time of the interrupt
    2. determines which device caused the interrupt and performs device-specific processing
    3. ...

##### OS/161 Thread Stack After an Intercept [19]

1. Add a trap frame
2. Interrupt handling

##### Preemptive Scheduling

* A preemptive scheduler imposes a limit, called the *scheduling quantum* on how long a thread can run before being preempted
    * If the thread exits or finishes before this time limit, everything is good
    * Every x units of time, the CPU fires an interrupt. This is a shorter cycle than the quantum.
        - This is how the CPU keeps track of how long threads have been running. This is also how the CPU determines a thread is complete
    * Suppose a thread exits 2ms into a 20ms cycle. We need to select a new thread, which will run for 38ms.
* The quantum is an upper bound on the amount of time that a thread can run. It may block or yield before its quantum has expired
* Periodic timer interrupts allow running time to be tracked.
* If a thread has run too long, the timer interrupt handler preempts the thread by calling `thread_yield`
* The preempted thread changes state from `running` to `ready`, and is placed on the *ready queue*

##### OS/161 Thread Stack After Preemption

The thread is running happily. Then, there is an interrupt. So, we immediately call the trap frame.

Then, we let the interrupt handler (some specific handler depending on when/why the thread was interrupted) do its business.

The thread is yielded, and then the CPU switches to a new thread.

There needs to be a balance between the quantum and how much work is actually done in a thread. We don't want to interrupt a thread so often that hardly any work gets done. This will be especially bad if the interrupt handling and thread switching does more work than the thread itself.
