---
title:  "2017-05-16-CS350"
date:   2017-05-16 00:00:00 -0400
categories: CS350
layout: post
---
## 2017-05-16-CS350


#### cont'd from last class

We try to avoid race conditions. To do this, we need some sort of synchronization.

To protect critical sections, we use locks

Previously, we stated that C code doesn't work for building `Acquire`.
    - If lock is initially available, and two threads try to acquire it
        + T1 starts, reaches the `while(*lock)` line, and exits the loop
        + We have a context switch
        + T2 starts, and exits the `while(*lock)` loop. It sees `*lock=true` and finishes
        + T1 resumes, and sets `*lock=true` and enters the critical section
    - Can we fix this with C code? Doesn't look like it
    - We need a hardware-level function. An atomic instruction that cannot be broken into smaller piece
        + Means we **will not** have an interupting between the test (loop) and set (=true) operations.
        + x86 has an instruction called `xchg $src, addr`
            * puts the src/value of $src into $addr
            * the old value of $addr will be put into $src
    

```
xchg(value, addr) {
    old = *addr;
    *addr = value;
    return old;
}
```

* xchg is, effectively, an atomic test and set. If the lock is not available (i.e. lock==false), it will set it to true and return false (and exit loop). If the lock is not available, xchg returns true and keeps spinning
    * see slide 18 to see in-line assembly in C
    * this course will not ask you to do it...

##### Acquire using xchg

```
Acquire(bool *lock) {
    while(xchg(true, lock));
}
```


#### SPARC

Side note, SPARC was the first 64-bit architecture. SPARC 64 SLFX has 34 cores and was released last year.

* 32 cores are for general purpose
* 2 of them are reserved for utility and the operating system
    - This means you can have a very responsive operating system
* **Its atomic instruction is called `cas`**

```
compareAndSwap(addr, expectedValue, newValue) {
    old = *addr;
    if (old == expectedValue) // has the value changed since I last checked?
        *addr = newValue;
    return old;
}
```

* suppose *addr=15, expectedValue=12, newValue=3
    - *addr != expectedValue, so no change and return 15
    - For our purpose, suppose `expectedValue=false`. This is the only case when we should change the lock

##### Acquire using cas

```
Acquire(bool *lock) {
    while(cas(lock, false, true));
}
```


#### Spinlocks in OS/161

In our lock implementation, we shouldn't be accessing the assembly (for our assignment)

Spinlocks spin on the CPU until our desired state is reached and a lock can be acquired

* This seems like an obvious issue. `spinlocks` are using the CPU to do nothing important. There's no workaround, they have to do this to achieve what they do. Still, we can improve it.
* OS/161 spinlocks are implemented already
    * see semaphore implementation
    * there is an init, acquire, and release function provided


#### Using Load-Linked / Store-Conditional [18]

MIPS does not have an atomic instruction. It uses two instructions to achieve what we want.

* `x` is the old value in the addr `sd`
* `y=1` (want to set lock and acquire it, if possible)
* `if (x == value in sd)`
    - If values are the same, we will set `*sd=y` and then set `y=success`
    - Else, `y=failure`
* There are 3 outcomes for this code
    - Load-linked is going to get the old value of the lock.
    - If no code has changed the value of the lock, and the lock is true. Then `x == value in sd`, is true and we return success.
    - If no code has changed the value of the lock, and the lock is false, we'll take the lock and return success.
        + Hence, we need to check if `y==failure`. If true, return 1 and tell the while loop to keep spinning
            * Something else is using the lock
        + If `y=failure`, we don't return 0. The lock could be false and didn't change!
            * Here, `return x` which is the value at the lock before we took it.
                - If the lock was true and we took it, we'll return `x=true=1`.
                - If the lock was false, and we took it, we'll return `x=false=0` and we stop spinning
                - Double check this part

Ideally, if a lock is still spinning, we want it to sleep (not hog to CPU)
A lock, in this case, is just called a lock.

* Inside of `lock_acquire`, if we are unsuccessful, the lock is **blocked and goes to sleep**
    - For various reasons, a thread might need to wait for something
        + Wait for a lock to be released by another thread
        + Wait for data from a slow(er) device
        + Wait for input from a keyboard
        + Wait for busy device to become idle (like a printer)
    - When writing computationally heavy code, and we don't call yield, our CPU can begin to overheat.
        + It would help to send threads on vacation. The developer can put blocks in code to put threads to sleep to let the CPU cool down
    - When a thread blocks, it stops running.
        + The scheduler chooses a new thread to run
        + A context switch occurs: from the blocking thread to the new thread
        + The blocking thread is queued


#### Wait Channels in OS/161

We do not have a master "blocked queue". All the threads that are sleeping are waiting for something different, as mentioned above.

We will create a wait channel for every single thing a thread could be waiting on. If we have a lock (resource), it will have a wait channel.

* Wait Channels are just queues. When we call sleep, we put the thread onto the queue.
    - `wchan_sleep(..)`: currThread goes to sleep and puts it onto the wait channel specified
    - Thread goes to "blocked"
* We can wake one, or all of the threads
    - `wchan_wakeone/all(..)`: currThread goes to ready and master queue(?)
* We also have `wchan_lock(..)`
    - prevents operations on wait channel `wc`
    - ...

