---
title:  "2017-06-13-CS350"
date:   2017-06-13 00:00:00 -0400
categories: CS350
layout: post
---
## CS350, 2017-06-13

__Midterm Coverage__

Beginning of the course to slide 40 of __virtual memory__

__Recall__

1. p-bit addresses -> `2^p` bytes
2. we divide physical memory into frames
3. and divide virtual memory into pages
4. page size == frame size

__Questions__

How many pages are there, or what is the size of the page table

* given an amount of virtual memory, how many pages fit into it?
    - v.mem size = `2^v` bytes
    - pg. size = `2^m` bytes
    - # of pages = size of page table = # of page table entrys = `2^v / 2^m`
    - # of bits for pg. number = log(#PTES)
        + they'll give us #PTEs as a power of 2
        + eg. #PTES = `2^14`
        + then # of bits for pg. number = 14
    - we have pg. number to figure out which page of virtual memory the address sits in, and then we need an offset to determine where in physical memory this address is
        + pg. offset bits = log(page size)
            * eg. pg. size = `2^10`, then pg. offset bits = 10
    - once we have page number, we use it to look up a page table entry
        + this will tell us the corresponding physical memory frame number
            - if valid bit is set, the frame is in use
    - once we have a frame number, we get physical address = frame# * frame\_size + page_offset
        + (* frame_size ?)
5. 4kb = 0x1000 = 2^12

__Examples__

##### Address Translation (Process B) [vm_s19]

```
phys. addr = 18 bits
v. addr = 16 bits

...
```

* if we had an address that began with 0xe..., our valid bit in the page table is 0
    - this means there's no translation.
    - If the address cannot be translated, there is an exception


#### Other Information Found in PTEs

* PTEs may contain other fields, in addition to the frame\_number and valid_bit
    - eg. read\_only_bit
        + would handle cases where you try to write to the memory address
    - eg. bits to track page usage
        + reference (use) fit
            * has the process used this page recently?
        + dirty bit
            * have contents of this page been changed?
        + these bits are set by the MMU, and read by the kernel (more on this later)


#### How Large Are Page Tables?

A page table has one PTE for each page in virtual memory

* page table size = (number of pages) * (size of PTE)
* number of pages = (virtual memory size) / (page size)
* from this point on, page table size refers to the amount of space a page table occupies in memory
    - #PTEs * page size
* example
    - 64KB v.mem, 4kb pages, 32 bits per PTE
        + page table is 64 bytes
* page tables for larger virtual memories are larger

__Problems__

* page table with maybe a million entries, but our program is only a few kilobytes large
    - only a few PTEs will be used, out of millions available
* our page tables are really large, but mostly empty for most programs
    - not efficient
* good at preventing external fragmentation, but becomes deadweight lots of times
    - waste of space
        + whose space are we wasting? The kernel's
        + every process has a page table


#### Summary: Roles of the Kernel and the MMU

__Kernel__

* manage MMU registers on addr. space switches (context switch from thread in one process to thread in a different process)
* create and manage page tables
    - creates page table when process is created
* manage (allocate/deallocate) physical memory
* handle exceptions raised by the MMU

__MMU__

* translate v.addr to phys.addr
* check for and raise exceptions when necessary
* the kernel must also notify the MMU to use new page tables
* must do at least one address translation
    - it must translate the PC address to a physical addr
        + add $r0, $r1, $r2
* lw $12, __X($s3)__
    - each loadword instruction requires at least one translation
* accessing memory is expensive
    - add, sub, add, add, mult, mflo, mfhi, add
    - for each of these assembly instructions, the MMU has to translate an address
        + the PC that points to them needs to be translated
        + probability that these __sequential__ instructions live on the same page?
            * relatively high
            * spans at most two pages
                - why are we translating their addresses individually, each time?
    - if we have an array, our index values occupy sequential addresses
        + so, there's a pretty good chance that most arrays we have will fit in a single page of memory
            * yet, our MMU will still translate the v.mem addr of each of these values
            * we want to reduce how often the MMU has to go to RAM (to find the page table) for page-to-frame mapping


#### Translation Lookaside Buffer (TLB)

* Caches our page-to-frame mappings
* When we have a v.addr, and we obtain a page number, we first check the cache instead of going to the page table which resides in RAM
    - much faster to access this than RAM


#### TLB Usage

What the MMU does to translate a virtual address on page `p`

```
if there is an entry (p, f) in the TLB, then
    return f
        ; TLB hit
else
    find p's frame number (f) from the page table
    add (p, f) to the TLB
        ; evict another entry is full
        ; to decide who to evict, can use a dirty bit
    return f
        ; TLB miss
```

* If the MMU cannot distinguish TLB entries from different address spaces, then the kernel must clear or invalidate the TLB on each context switch from one process to another
    - `as_activate(...)`
    - if we don't clear, we will have page-to-frame mappings in our TLB for the incorrect process
* This is a hardware-managed TLB
    - the hardware goes to RAM and gets a new page-to-frame mapping after a TLB miss, etc
        + problem with hardware doing the work is that the hardware needs to know exactly what the page table entries look like
        + needs to know exactly what our page table implementation does
        + essentially, the hardware specifies, to the OS, how paging works
        + very fast, but restrictive from an OS


#### Software-Managed TLB

MIPS has a software-managed TLB, which translates a v.addr on page p like so

```
if there is an entry (p, f) in the TLB, then
    return f
        ; hit
else
    raise exception
        ; miss
```

* In case of a TLB miss, the __kernel__ must
    - determine the frame number for p
    - add (p, f) to the TLB, evicting another entry is necessary
        + for q3, we randomly evict an entry
* After the miss is handled, the instruction that caused the exception is retried


#### The MIPS R3000 TLB [vm_S27]

64 bits

1. upper 20 bits : page number
2. next 6 bits : PID (not used)
    * this PID can be used to match an entry to a process, so that it will not be used if the active process doesn't own the entry.
    * Not used in MIPS R3000... they put it there but don't use it
3. ...


#### A More Realistic Virtual Memory

There has to be a better way to do virtual memory that better represents what our virtual memory actually looks like

* Our page table has lots of invalid entries
    - not what our actual memory looks like
* The kernel itself lives between memory 0x8XXXXXXX to 0xFFFFFFFF
    - it is a part of a process' virtual memory space, but the process will never use this section of memory
* ...