---
title:  "2017-05-02-CS350"
date:   2017-05-02 00:00:00 -0400
categories: CS350
layout: post
---
CS350, 2017-05-02


What is an OS?
--> Nowadays, we think about our phone (iOS, Android), Windows laptops, Mac OS, Linux Unity, ...
--> Operating systems these days (mostly) have GUIs, are crisp & clean
--> Operating system ==> User experience
	* desktop environment
	* shell
	* interaction
	* not what is happening underneath (today, at least)

An operating system is more than the Desktop or Shell
Three views
--> Applcation view
	* What services does the OS provide?
--> System View
	* What problems does the OS solve?
--> Implementation View
	* How is the OS build? (our focus)


I. Application View
The OS provides an execution environment for running programs
--> The execution environment provides a program with the processor time and memory space that it needs to run.
	* creates the environment in which the program will run. Sets the PC counter to start running it
--> The execution environment provides interfaces through which a program can use networks, storage, I/O devices, and other system hardware components.
	* Interfaces provide a simplified, abstract view of hardware to application programs
--> The execution environment isolates running programs from one another and prevents undesireable interactions among them

Operating Systems were simpler back then... for the simple reason that there wasn't much to do back then. The user would play one game at a time.
--> These days, Chrome itself probably has 14 tabs...
--> NES cartridges were self-bootable. The game didn't need an operating system to run

Drawbacks: consider the Atari 2600
--> No operating system, hence no APIs for the device
	* this means every game needed to handle the sound, controls, etc. They needed to build the drivers themselves whenever they wanted to build a game
		* this is probably why it didn't have many games. Or, games didn't work properly


II. System View
The OS manages the hardware resources of a computer system
--> Resources include processors, memory, disks and other storage devices, network interfaces, I/O devices like keyboards, etc ...
--> CPU power and memory are limited, but must be distributed/allocated among running programs. The OS controls the sharing of resources.
	* makes sure no program takes more than it should
--> The OS iteself uses resources, which it must share with application programs


III. Implementation View of an OS
The OS is a concurrent, real-time program
--> Concurrency arises naturally in an OS when it supports concurrent applications, and because it must interact directly with the hardware
--> Hardware interactions also impose timing constraints
	* OS needs some kind of library to share these resources
		* a printer, for example, can only print one item at a time. We need some software means to ensure current jobs aren't interrupted


An OS...
--> Virtualizes and abstracts resources
	* don't want the program to interact with the graphics card directly. As such, the operating system needs an interface to allow interation (abstracted)
		* don't want to set the frames and update displays yourself. The OS provides functions in the form of draw(..) to abstract this
--> Creates execution environments for applications
--> Provides persistence: manages data that exists after shutdown


The OS and the Kernel
--> used to be called the Master Control Proram (MCP)
--> kernel
	* the operating system kernel is the part that responds to system calls, interrupts, and exceptions
--> operating system
	* includes the kernel, and may include other related programs that provide services for applications
		* utility programs (like scans)
		* command interpreters (like shells)
		* programming libraries (like C libraries, drivers, APIs)
	* started out as just I/O libraries. These were common, and made sense to make them reuseable.
	* then came batch scripts
	* ...
	* multi-programming: the CPU was idle when memory operations took a while. Naturally, it made sense to figure out how to use the CPU during this downtime.
	* eventually, concurrency, etc ...


OS Abstractions
The execution environment provided by the OS inclues a variety of abstract entities that can be manipulated by a running program.
--> files and file systems
	* abstract view of secondary storage
--> address spaces
	* abstract view of primary memory. Extension: virtual memory
--> processes and threads
	* abstract view of program execution
--> sockets and pipes
	* abstract view of network or other message channels. The user doesn't have to worry about passing bytes and some such.


Topics
0. Introduction
1. Threads & Concurrency
2. Synchronization
	* protect data that is being used by different threads
3. Processes and the Kernel
4. Virtual memory
5. Scheduling
	* make sure programs are distributed the necessary resources in an optimal way
6. Devices and Device Management
	* harddrives, SSDs, etc
7. File systems
8. Interprocess Communication and Networking

Try not to use printf(...). GDB
