---
title:  "2017-06-20-CS350"
date:   2017-06-20 00:00:00 -0400
categories: CS350
layout: post
---
## CS350, 2017-06-20

__Assignment 2B__

* Builds off of 2A
    - Some marks are dedicated to retesting 2A
        + 18 marks for `onefork, pidcheck, widefork, forktest`
    - There are some 2B tests with 2A implementation dependencies
        + eg. `hogparty` uses fork
* Remaining marks are dedicated to `int execv(const char *prog, char **args)`
    - We have a process that is executing some program
    - Call execv, which changes the program the process is running
        + will destroy currently running program
        + create a new address space
        + load new program
        + begin executing new program
    - __Can__ use fork to implement a part of execv, but execv does not fork a new processes
* Params
    - `execv` should support programs that take parameters
    - Need to get all these params into the kernel
        + We'll load a new program
            * Need to throw old address space out
* **Runprogram**
    - `execv` is very similar to `runprogram (kern/syscall/runprogram.c`
        + recommend
            * make `sys_execv` copy the contents of `runprogram` into it (this is your starting point)
    - Runprogram is used to load and execute the first program from the menu
        + opens the program file using `vfs_open(progname, ...)`
        + creates a new addrspace (as_create)
        + switches the process to that addrspace (curproc_setas)
        + then activates the addrspace (as_activate)
            * as_activate clears the TLB
            * when we change the program that is running (and creating a new address space), need to clear the TLB mappings for the current process
        + using the opened program file, load the program image using `load_elf`
            * `load_elf` helps, for defined data segment, determine its size and properties
        + define the user stack using `as_define_stack`
            * this stack is limited to 12 pages, and no more
        + after we've defined the stack, we need to call `enter_new_process`
            - with no params
            - the stack pointer (determined by `as_define_stack`)
            - and entry point for the executable (determined by `load_elf`)
    - This is the code that executes when you type 'p' in the kernel menu
    - __Note__
        + in `execv`, we are not creating a new process, so we can't just use runprogram. However, runprogram is a good place to start
* **execv**
    - Copy number of arguments and copy them (the arguments) into the kernel
        * copy from the user addrspace into the kernel
            - there are functions to help do this
    - Copy the program path into the kernel
        * need to copy this into the kernel because we're destroying the old addrspace
    - Some steps from runprogram
        + Open the program file using vfs_open(...)
        + Create the new addrspace, set process to use new addrspace, and activate it
        + Using the opened prog file, load the prog image using `load_elf`
    - Need to copy the arguments into the new addrspace.
        + Consider copying the arguments (both the array and the strings) onto the user stack as part of `as_defined_stack`
            - push, in a very specific way, all the params I had extracted in step 1 (and the path?) onto the stack
            - may need to modify `as_defined_stack` to do this part
    - Delete old addrspace
        + We don't delete the old addrspace earlier because some steps above may fail. We want to return an appropriate error code that can be handled in a friendly way.
            * If we delete the addrspace after the 2nd step, we have to panic when something goes wrong in steps (3) and (4)
    - Call `enter_new_process` with address to the arguments on the stack, the stack pointer (from `as_defined_stack`), and the program entry point (from `vfs_open()`)
* __Issues__
    - When copying from/to userspace
        + Use copyin/copyout for fixed size variables (integers, arrays, etc)
        + Use copyinstr/copyoutstr when copying NULL terminated strings
    - Useful defines/macros
        + USERSTACK (base address of stack)
        + ROUNDUP (useful for memory alignment)
    - Common mistakes
        + Remember that `strlen` does not count the NULL terminator. Make sure to include space for the NULL terminator
            * must add 1 to the length
        + The array is also NULL terminated
            * `char **params`
                - last entry is NULL
                - count elements one at a time until NULL
                - need to allocate an array in the kernel to hold all these params
                - each param is a NULL terminated string
                    + allocate sufficient memory to hold this NULL terminator
        + User pointers should be of the type userptr_t
            * eg. the interface for sys_execv should be...
                - `int sys_execv(userptr_t progname, userptr_t args)`
        + Make sure to pass a pointer to the top of the stack into `enter_new_process`
* __Alignment__
    - Byte alignment
    - When storing items on the stack, padd each item such that they are 8-byte aligned
        + ints, bools, etc
        + eg. `args_size = ROUNDUP(args_size, 8)`
    - Strings don't have to be 4 or 8-byte aligned. However, pointers to strings need to be 4-byte aligned
    - USERSTACK
        + Argument strings (each string is NULL terminated)
        + Argument array. Last entry is NULL
    - Top of stack --------
* __Advice__
    - get `execv` working for programs without parameter handling
        + `hogparty`
        + `sty`
    - once those are working, start tinkering with program arguments
        + first, implement something that determines # of params (step 1)
        + second, allocate kernel space for them (step 2)
        + third, copy params into step 2
    - print these values out. Make sure you've gotten these arguments __out of the old addrspace__ correctly
        + once this is done, only then should you start putting them on the stack



#### Multi-Level Paging

* We can solve the large directory problem by introducing additional levels of directories
* Example: 4-level paging in x86-64 architecture
* Properties of Multi-Level Paging
    - can map large virtual memories by adding more levels
    - individual page tables/directories can remain small
    - can avoid allocating page tables and directories that are not needed for programs that use a small amount of v.mem
    - __Main issue__
        + TLB misses become more expensive as the number of levels goes up, since more directories must be accessed to find the correct PTE
            * looks up first page table
            * goes to next page table
            * ...
            * until it finds the final page table
            * is invalid... fuck
        + goes to RAM as many as X times for X-level paging
        + not mention, the kernel itself is in v.mem, so we need to translate those memory addresses as well
* Add levels until each page table can fit in one page
    - This probably means we'll have a lot of page tables
    - eg. in a 48-bit addr architecture, we only need 4 levels, so it's not so bad
* Example?
    - Page offset
        + if pg. size ix X bytes, pg. offset is log(X) bits
            * eg. 4KB pg. size => 2^12 bytes => 12 bits for pg. offset
            * our # of bits for pg. offset is __only__ dependent on the pg. size
    - How many PTEs on a page?
        + given size of PTE
        + # PTEs = pg. size / sizeOfPTE => 2^12 / 2^2 = 2^10 PTEs per page
            * If we want to keep our page table in one page, we need to figure out how many entries we can fit onto a page
            * Notice we don't figure out how many levels we need until we know the number of PTEs per page
    - # of bits for pg. number = log(#PTEs per page) => log(2^10) = 10
    - `| ... | PB | PB | PB | PB |     OFFSET     |`
        + from our example
            * `|    10    |    10    |      12      |`
                - 32-bits
                - and we have 2-levels for our paging
        - A more mathematical method
        + NUM_LEVELS = ceil((VBITS - OFFSET BITS) / PG NUM BITS)
            * VBITS = # bits for v.addr
            * OFFSET BITS = page offset bits