---
title:  "2017-05-25-CS350"
date:   2017-05-25 00:00:00 -0400
categories: CS350
layout: post
---
## CS350, 2017-05-25

Condition variable test: `synchtest.c, line 61, sy3`

Incrementing # of CPUs

* don't exceed 32 CPUs. Use 8 or 16
* By increasing the # of CPUs, you increase the probability of encountering sycnhronization issues

##### Assignment 1 hints

Traffic light: synchronize cars going through an intersection, and ensure no accidents

* Solve sync problem using locks and control variables
* Cars can go N->S, E->W, and make L/R turns
    - When you come up to an intersection, theres >1 car going through at once. Instead of just letting one car through N->S, we want cars going S->N to also go through

__Hints__

* Best solutions? 4 CVs and 1 Lock
* Also possible to use 3 CVs and 1 Lock
    - Consider the rules
        + If a car is going N->S, what are the other possible cases of cars going through the intersection? Definitely not E->W or W->S
* Don't worry about fairness
    - If first solution works, fuck it. Move on
    - If not, ...
        + Real traffic lights work in a few different ways. Some lights operate on timers, regardless of the number of cars waiting at the light. Don't use timers, but check out an alternate approach
        + Suppose cars are going N->S. If no cars are going E->W, no point switching light. If a car shows up and is waiting for the light to switch
            * Could wait for the intersection empty, then switch
            * Or recognize a waiting car, and let at most N more cars, then switch
                - Set a "pressure plate" to check number of cars going thru
            * `cv_broadcast` wakes up every thread
                - if you wake up 5 threads but then need to sleep 95 others because you woke 100, is that worth?
* Common approach: 1 CV for each direction of origin
    - There are other possible reasons for each CV...
* There is a dynamic array implementation in `array.h`
* Don't worry about # of lanes. If cars go N->S at the same time, they'll call entry() at slightly different times anyways.
* See Piazza about # of iterations and tests to test with
* Don't do extra work



### Deadlocks

The programmer is responsible for discovering and handling race conditions, and figuring our which synchronization primitives are needed.

* Suppose there are two threads and two locks, lockA, lockB, both initially unlocked
* Suppose the following sequence of events occur
    - Thread 1 acquires lockA
    - Thread 2 acquires lockB
    - Thread 1 tries to acquire lockB
    - Thread 2 tries to acquire lockA

Problem(s)

1. (1) gets lockA
2. (2) gets lockB
3. (1) tries to get lockB, goes to sleep waiting for lockB
4. (2) tries to get lockA, goes to sleep waiting for lockA
5. This code is permanently stuck, because only (2) can release lockB, but is asleep. Only (1) can release lockA, but is asleep.

#### Two Techniques for Deadlock Prevention

##### No Hold and Wait
    
* Prevent threads from requesting resources if it currently has a resource(s) allocated to it.
* A thread may hold several resources, but to do so it must make a single request for all of them
* Suppose we have multiple resources: critical section, modem, and printer
    - If we have a lock on printer, but cannot acquire a lock on the modem, we must release the lock on printer
    - With that said, we need a new method of acquiring locks: `try_acquire`
        + returns true if you get the lock
        + returns false if you do not get the lock
            * don't block
        + must acquire all resources **in one call**, together

```
acquire(res0); // regular acquire: you either wait on the first resource, or get it. We don't own any other resources at the moment

while(I don't get all resources) {
    try_acquire(each resource we want)
    if false
        release all held

    // spin in loop trying to acquire **all** resources until we get them
}
```

This thread is spinning instead of blocking

* It avoids deadlock, but introduces busy waiting. The loop hogs CPU until all resources are acquired
    - quite simple to implement, and is popular

##### Resource Ordering

Assign a number/order to resource types, and require that each thread acquire resources in increasing resource type order

* A thread may make no requests for resources of type <= *i* if it is holding resources of type *i*.
* Just ensure we are acquiring locks in same increasing order



### Summary

...