CS350, 2017-05-04

### THREADS AND CONCURRENCY ###

Threads provide a way for programmers to express concurrency in a program

Note:

* Scheduling can encounter different delays, so don't expect threads to go in any particular order
* `printf` forces threads to run in a particular order, thus hiding different problems that can occur in scheduling

#### OS/161 Threaded Concurrency Examples ####

* A thread can create new threads using `thread_fork`
* New threads start execution in a function specified as a parameter to `thread_fork`
* The original thread which called `thread_fork` and the new thread proceed concurrently, as two simultaneous sequential threads of execution
* All threads share access to the program's global variables and heap
    - Threads can communicate with each other throw global variables/flags. This lets you control the flow by halting a certain thread until a flag is set to true
    - Threads do not share stacks (more info later)
* Each thread's function activations are private to that thread

#### Prototype for thread_fork ####

```
int thread_fork(
    const char *name, // name of new thread, used for debugging
    struct proc *proc, // NULL for now to make this thread part of the existing program
    void (* func) // entry point: new thread's function
        (void *, unsigned long),
    void *data1, // function's first param
    unsigned long data2 // function's second param
);
```

* See `kern/include/thread.h`
* terminate the calling thread using `void thread_exit(void);`
    - not relevant for OS/161, but other libraries' `thread_exit` returns a status code to the parent. Can just `return`
* voluntarily yield exectuion using `void thread_yield(void);`
    - `thread_yield` enabled co-operative concurrency. Programs that didn't call `thread_yield` didn't have concurrency, because only that thread would be running

#### Why Threads? ####

1. Parallelism exposed by threads enables parallel execution if the underlying hardware supports it
* programs can run faster
2. Parallelism exposed by threads enables better processor utilization
* if one thread has to block, another may be able to run

#### The Stack ####

When using multiple threads, need to pay attention to the stack frame of each operation

If I have multiple threads in the same program, they're going to share an address space. They don't get their own copy of the data. Their stack, however, is going to be unique
    
* the local variable values for each thread is particular to that thread
    * we can't do this without unique stacks
    * Question: why not just use the entire stack for every thread?
        * how to keep track with each thread's specific frames?
        * The idea of a stack is to be able to push and pop without having to worry about order. If all the threads' frames are interleaved, we can't do that.
* conceptually, each thread executes sequentially using its private register contents and stack
* Each thread also keeps its own copy of the program counter
* Each thread has its own stack pointer (for obvious reasons)
* When we start running a new thread, we need to save the old thread's state(s)

#### Debugging OS/161 ####

Need to connect OS/161 to compiler. NEED 2 CONNECTION INSTANCES TO SEE THE DEBUG

* sys161 -w
    - -w : wait for a connection with debugger before proceeding
    - The debugger connection will be init'd in another terminal instance
* cs350-gdb kernel-ASST0
    - initialize debugger connection using assignment 0
    - `dir ../os161-1.99/kern/compile/ASST0` into (gdb)
* need to set some breakpoints first
* note: see stack: enter `bt` into (gdb). This will show the backtrace
* note: see values of variables at a breakpoint: enter `print curthread` into (gdb) to show the value of `curthread`. It may initially show the pointer address of curthread, but you can use pointer arithmetic to get the actual value. Example: `print *curthread`