---
title:  "2018-01-16-CS449"
date:   2018-01-16 00:00:00 -0400
categories: CS449
layout: post
---
# CS 449

Focus on target user groups.

* Look at different types of people in user group
* Need to create a participant pool
	- Should be same type
* ...

## Understanding Your Users: Exploratory Studies

### Questionnaires

* Open-ended and closed-ended questions
    - Multiple choice, matrix questions, scaled questions, semantic differential and likert scale questions are closed-ended
    - Unstructured, explanation, completion, and association questions are open-ended

### Observations

* Active/passive particpation, complete participation, non-participatory
* Naturalistic and controlled
* Record artifacts users manipulate
* Use codes and symbols
    - Things are happening too fast, use faster identification symbols that can be easily decoded
* Separate tasks, goals, motivations
* Separate actions and body language
* Separate **observations** and **interpretations**
    - The former doesn't necessarily lead to the latter
        + eg. Smiling doesn't always mean happy
* Participants your side notes separate
* Separate "says" and "does"

### Interviews

* In-depth discussion of the topic with a participant
* Usually one-on-one
* Written, audio, video recording options (_requires consent_)

##### Structured

Not much room to ideate and conceptualize. Interviews are very guided.

* Same set of questions
* Standardized process
* Little freedom of expression
* Often self-reported

##### Semi-structured

Other stories and questions that occur can be integrated

* Structure isn't as strict, and room for movement is available
* Has a list of guiding questions/topics
    - Leading questions influence the response in some way, usually by using implications
        + Should be avoided, because they don't provide unbiased results
* Often preceded by observation
* One of the most popular

##### Narrative (Unstructured)

General direction of where the interview wants to go

* Focus and objective guides the discussion
* Open-ended questions
* Freedom of expression & little control

##### Focus groups

Usually moderated, and directing conversation, but allows groups of people to develop conversations themselves.

* Semi-structured
* Moderated
* 6-10 homogeneous strangers
* May permit discussion
* Emerged in the 1940s

### Diary/Camera Studies

* Includes a mechanism (diary or camera) to record/describe relevant activities in everyday settings
    - For external validitiy, time and place matter
        + Thus, providing diverse environments, the additional data provides better, more applicable responses
* Longitudinal
    - "How do you feel at this moment?"
    - These questions spread across periods of time
* Data recorded by participants based on provided guidelines

**Diary study**

* A log of activities/behaviours you can use over a period of time
* Highlight things that stood out over the course of the day
* Photos provides better insight than simple words
    - Shows habits and behaviours over a time-frame that is often missed because we don't keep track of them explicitly
* Two weeks to two months
    - Depends on what is being investigated
    - Requires individuals that express information easily

### Participatory Design

* Participants are given design elements
    - Get individuals from your target audience to construct their ideal experience in real-time
        + Get answers quickly, and apply updates quickly
        + However, regarding reactivity, people kind of forget about generalization. They get caught up in the creative process that they forget about useability
* Helps to understand values and uncover mental models

### Ethnographic Field Studies

* Natural environment, everyday life
* First-hand participation in users' activities
* Description of the scene, key events, key actors, key artifacts, and actions
* Combination of observations and interviews
* Focus on objective behaviours

How can we improve the experience of the cruise head chef?

* First, analyze his tasks
    - Wakes up, checks emails and prepares
    - Meeting with his chef team
        + Interacting with chefs, and team
        + Instructions for the day
            * Cannot be done remotely
    - Invent(?)
    - Testing(?)
    - Interacting with potential customers

**Ethnographic Field Studies = Observations + Interviews + Natural context**

### Contextual Inquiry

* Natural environment, everyday life
* First-hand participation in participants' activities
* Relatively short (several hours)
* Research heavily involved in the process and constantly asks questions
* Mostly rely on self-report data

## Understanding Your Users: Analyzing Qualitative Data

Row-qualitative-data is "fuzzy data". It's not actionable yet

* Notes on cards --> Review the cards --> Sorting and grouping --> Smaller subgroups --> Themes in Data
    - This is our affinity datagram
        + Use all data
        + Use colour
            * eg. separate what people say from what they do
        + Regroup often
        + Use fresh view
        + Give it time
        + Trust

Self-balancing electric scooter (hover board)

* Observation 1
    - Unboxing
        + Manual first
            * **Doesn't look at it. Thinks he can get it done. Goes back to it later.**
        + Then charger cable
        + Then main item
    - Battery state(s)
        + "I think when it gets to yellow..." --> Mental model
    - Testing it out
        + Tried it out, didn't work well. "I have to read the manual"
        + Trying it with one foot first
            * **Fell, and kept trying but with another foot**
                - **Why does/should it matter?**
        + Lean forward --> move forward
        + Lean back --> backward
* Observation 2
    - Manual first, and actually looks through it
        + "Hope we don't have to charge for 24 hours"
        + Remote starter?
    - See charger, a lot smaller than expected
    - "Ordered black, but got green."
    - LED, potentially for battery indicators
    - Went back to look through manual before trying it out

## Quiz 1(?)

Talking about top ten key points of innovation, Guy Kawasaki gives an example with a car key

* ...

Who developed the concept of persona and what it is about (briefly)

* Creating a fictional character that embodies the characteristics of who you're studying

What Mobile-first design principle and what benefits does it provide?

* Progressive UI
* Design for mobile first, then expand to larger view-ports. Space-limitations and context allows better focus
    - Content-focused approach for UI
* Mobile is ubiquitous—it is everywhere
    - Phones are much more personal and satisfying. It is your alter ego, fundamental to everything you do

## Understand Your Users: Exploratory Studies

### Exploratory Study

##### Motivational system

* Goals and tasks (need)
* Desirabiltiy (want)
* Emotional charge (fears, frustration, pleasure)

##### Contextual knowledge & beliefs

##### Cognitive (mental) model

* A cognitive representation of how something works/is organised
* Based on previous experience & beliefs
    - defines reasoning


`Enlightened trial and error succeeds over the trials of a lone genius`


## Translating Needs into Functionalities

#### Make data actionable

##### Adjust personas

- Make them more colourful and detailed, based on generalized characteristics of your participants that you didn't account for previously
    + There are likely several

##### Affinity diagrams

- A sense-making tool for qualitative data
    + Notes on cards --> Review --> Sorting --> Subgroups --> Themes

##### Breakdowns

- Where and when things go wrong in individuals work practice
- Points in time or space when individuals have a problem accomplishing the task that should otherwise be easy, given the tools they're using
- Unpacking the tacit dimension for possible design solutions

##### Cultural model (assignment 2)

- External influences
    + Important because work takes place in a culture, which defines expectations, desires, policies, vaues, and work approach itself
- Includes
    + Influences (bubbles)
    + Extent of influence (size of bubbles, overlap)
    + Influences (as arrows with direction)
    + Breakdowns

##### Artifact models

- Physical objects that support the work (created and/or used in the process)
    + Because you want to know what objects people need and interact with
    + Also applies to applications as well. These can be described using artifact models because they involve interaction
- Sketch or photo
- Complete with comments and notes regarding
    + Structure
    + Related purpose and tasks
    + Functionality

Creation of artifact models

* Based on our findings and cultural model, we have inspirations for creating our artifact models.

#### Identify right time and place

##### Physical model

* Because you want to known how people adapt their environment to accomplish work
    - Structures that limit and define space
    - Walls, desks, file cabinets, tables, chairs, etc
        + Things used in the process
    - Hardware, software, communication tools
    - Artifacts and their location in relation to each other
* Practically
    - How a chef on a cruise can observe his kitchens
    - How far a chef has to walk around
* Complete with comments and notes
* Not too detailed, just acknowledge that these things exist

Example

* Art library, workspaces, etc
* Printers are far away, so that's a breakdown, because the user is too far
* Door to oft-used room is on the opposite side of the wall --> breakdown
* Tall people block the lecture-hall screen for people behind --> breakdown

##### Sequence model

* Sequence of work steps and the intention behind steps
    - Because you want to know how work is organized in stages
* Includes
    - Intent behind step
    - Triggers that initiate sequence
    - Steps, at a high-level of details (actions, not movements)
    - Loops and branches showing order and iteratio
    - Breakdowns

Example (Hoverboard model)

1. Beginning: Open the box
    * Difficulties? Nah --> No breakdown
    * Trigger? Arrival of the package
|
|
V
2. Scan the inside of the box
|
|
V
3. Picked up manual
    * Expected to look through it, but usually didn't
    * Breakdown: Puts the manual away without reading
    * Trigger?

##### Flow model

* Directions of communication and coordination
* Defines how work is broken up across people and how people coordinate
* Includes
    - Interviewee (in the middle)
    - Other groups/people (circles)
    - Physical/virtual places (usually rectangles)
    - Artifacts as they pass between people
    - Breakdowns (where things go wrong)

```
...
```

## Create Design Ideas

**Creativity**: process of producing a new idea which has value to someone

### Nature v. Nuture

During brainstorming, we prefer quantity over quality

* Generating ideas: memories --> ordinary --> extraordinary
    - How do we get to these extraordinary ideas?

### Create Ideas

#### Preparation

* Define the constraints
    - Goals, parameters of the challenge, resources, time
* Knowledge and understanding around the challenge, both academic and casual
* Assumptions can be challenged
    - eg. a restaurant: what are some assumptions?
        + You order food there
            * Is this a challenge-able assumption? Sure.
    - This is how we can achieve new ideas/concepts

#### Provocation

* Overcoming associative limitations
    - Rules we know about the world or some area 
        + A while ago, we didn't really see how we could combine computers and phones
        + Now, smartphones bridge the gap better than ever
* Design fixation
    - When you know something works (or a solution), and you cannot think of any other solution
        + Don't use design solutions too early, or you get fixated on it
* Concept of _po_ by Edward de Bono
* Force of habits
* Framing and reframing problems
* Practice true randomness
    - It's really hard to be truly random...
        + Think of some "random" word
        + Every day, try to think of a random word. This can help create new connections
* Connect and combine
    - How can this random concept relate to something you're doing
* Change the routine
    - Do something different: introduce new factors into your life

#### Incubation

* Mindful procrastination can sometimes be helpful
    - When actively thinking abouting something/brainstorming --> beta waves
    - When resting --> alpha waves
        + Need to approach the problem first: give a task to your subconsciousness
        + Different aspects of creativity require different brain activity
* Most ideas are formed subconsciously

#### Eureka moment

* An idea that might solve the challenge is pushed to the conscious level
* Usually difficult to explain how you came up with this idea
* **Always write it down in the moment, no matter what**

#### Verification

* All ideas are rough when they are first visualized
    - Get it through the criticism
* Be optimistic --> Give your crazy ideas a chance
* **No right answers --> Only working solutions**

#### Realization

##### Sketches

Illustration of how the basic concept works

* Low-fidelity, fast
* Supports brainstorming
* Speeds up your work
* Doesn't necessarily have to look good
* Supports communication: allows you to talk about ideas
* Tells a story
    - eg. a problem that needs to be solved

##### User stories

As a user or persona, I want/need _{action}_ so that I can achieve some _{goal}_

* Helps us avoid forgetting simple things
    - People are going to be using your application, so it might help you avoid forgetting things like navigation, etc
* Keep it simple
* Keep breaking them down
    - Example
        + As a user, I _want_ to send an email...
            * _Need_ to input recipient addresses
                - As a user, _want_ to have address suggestions for quicker searches
            + _Want_ to enter a message
                - Might _want_ to format text
    - We're going from higher levels to lower levels so that we can focus on particular aspects that we need to work on
* Have acceptance criteria
* A communication tool
* Keep them visible
* Prevent dead-ends

##### Wireframes

Static representation of the UI layout and user flow

* Quick, cheap, easy
* Used as the documentation
    - Communication between designers and developers
* Using pixelated widgets
* Main groups of contens, structure of content
* Only basic visualization

Vs. Mock-ups?

* Mockups are the highest fidelity. Mockups are much closer to the actual application, and request specific design aspects
* Blueprint vs. photo of the application

### Design

#### Interface

* A surface/place where two independent systems, bodies or spaces meet/form a common boundary, and communicate with each other
* Something that represents an underlying system?
    - Has encoded information as to how it should be interacted with
        + eg. Push bars on doors indicate push-to-open
        + eg. Automatic doors indicate you should just keep walking
    - When we approach these components, we understand the information they encode based on our own mental models and/or previous experiences
        + In our interfaces, need to find a way to interact through different aspects of the interface, allowing the user to understand how to interact with it as well
* A communication channel

#### Communication

Exchanging of information

##### Semiotics

The study of signs and symbols

* Sign
    - Anything that communicates a meaning
    - Representamen (signifier)
        + The form of the sign
            * eg. The soundwaves that are heard as "chair"
            * As signifiers change, interpretants change in real-time
    - Interpretant
        + What people make of the sign
            * eg. What you think of when you hear and interpret "chair"
            * Not guaranteed to match the signified object
    - Object (signified)
        + Actual reference of the sign
            * eg. The actual chair

##### Signifier

* Indicators of any type that communicate the action needed so the affordance can take place
    - A play button, pointer-cursor, door-knob indicate a specific action (click, turn and pull, etc)

##### Affordance

* The possible use for an object when interacting with it
    - Keyhole: shape of a key, indicating you can insert a key to interact with it
    - Baby chair: put a baby in it

##### Constraints

* Negative affordances: restrictions that limit the possible actions available with an object
    - eg. A fence indicates keep-out
    - **Physical**
        + Caused by physical features, eg. fences
    - **Cultural**
        + Based on what is culturally accepted, eg. driving on the left side of the road, posting someone else's work online
    - **Semantic**
        + Based on the meaning of the situation, eg. "do not disturb" signs mean don't enter
    - **Logical**
        + Use reasoning to determine the alternatives, eg. don't put a square into a circle, lego blocks
    - Sometimes, there is a mix of multiple types

##### Feedback

* Conveys effects of user's actions
    - Makes sure the user understands their action was received
        + eg. Loading spinners, confirmations
* Location
    - Where am I in the process
* Current status
    - What's happening right now?
        + eg. Loading, someone is typing, etc.
* Future status
    - What's next, what should the user expect?
* Outcomes
    - What just happened?
        + eg. Completion, etc
* Time
    - How many steps are left, how much time is remaining, loading time
* Reasons
    - Why do you do what you do?
* Presence
    - Process has input on the system

Why do we want feedback?

* So the user knows something is happening. But why do they want to know that?
    - Prevents users from trying invalid input?
        + eg. Quitting during a process when they don't realize it
* In general, actions require reactions

**Feedback Loop**

* Speed: influence decisions
    - What the reaction is for. If it takes too long to get feedback, the user might assign the reaction to something else
    - Speed should correspond to expectations
        * If I start download, I should see the spinner/loader immediately
* Context
    - Meaning of your feedback
* Motivation
    - ...
* Measurability
    - Provide comparisons
        + ...

**How do we find these loops?**

* First, need to look at actions (esp. those that are repeated)
    - What triggers them
* ...

##### Discoverability

Whether it's possible to figure out how to use an object by interacting with it

**Findability**

* Whether it's easy to find the content
* F-patterns for reading web content (sp. Google search results)
* Applications/patterns
    - Important info in first 2 lines
    - Lots of meaning in first 2 words
    - Variation in size, visuals (bolding, etc)
    - Bullet points
    - Visual grouping

**Learnability**

* Whether it's easy to learn how to use the functionality
* Make use of existing practices and familiar interactions. This increases learnability by reducing the number of things to learn
* Build around exsidawting mental models
    - Goes with familiarity
* Make use of signifiers and affordances
    - Basically, tell the user as much as possible

##### Mapping

Indication of the relationship between objects. Often controls.

* **Spacial correspondance**
    - Not mapping numbers --> buttons, but rather the number next to a button is "mapped" to that button
    - Switches next to text are mapped to that text/option
* Examples
    - Elevator buttons: numbers --> floors
    - Thermostat round knobs
        + Makes use of gestalt principles
        + Makes use of culture-specifics and existing mental models
            * eg. turn right for increase, turn left for decrease

##### Conceptual Model

User's understanding of how the system works, communicated through the design

* For people to use a product perfectly, they must have the same mental model as that of the designer

##### Exercise: Time management application

**Individual brainstorm**

* Wake the fuck up
* No snooze feature because they will abuse it
* Irresistable alarm-defusal
* Push-back/delay for scheduled tasks like doing work, because we know they'll procrastinate
    - Get people's crap out of their system first so they can sit down and do some damn work
* Moving scheduled tasks around easily
* Create tasks
* Create delay maximums
* Warning flags for time running out before tasks must be started
* Task aggregation in a visualized manner
* Timer that psychologically pushes users to be productive
    - Give fake time

**Team ideation and user stories**

```
As a user, I want to wake up after a nap so that I can begin doing work.

> As a user, I want to avoid abusing the snooze button
```

```
As a user, I want to create a schedule for myself

> As a user, I need to input tasks
> As a user, I want to see my tasks in an intuitive visualization
```

```
As a user, I want to procrastinate

> As a user, I need to complete my assignments
> As a user, I want to be able to chill around instead
```

```
As a user, I want to be notified if my ass is running out of time

> As a user, I need to input maximum time allotted
> As a user, I want to receive warnings when my time is running out
```

**Crazy Eights**

There are lots of ways to design widgets and screens

* For **one** feature create **eight** layouts in **five** minutes

### From Creating Design Ideas --> Prototype Design

#### Site/App Flows & User Flows

* The **path** a user follows through an application
    - Does not have to be linear, can branch out
* **Goal** is to optimize users ability to accomplish a task with the least amount of steps
    - Communicates transitions
* The former
    - What pages/screens are **needed**
    - What pages/screens should be **linked**
    - Help to design a **navigation experience**
        + You can have multiple screens, but how do they interact with each other? Which buttons do what, etc
* The latter
    - **Microinteractions** and **responses**
    - Help to analyze the **efficiency** of a task
    - Often attached to **personas**

#### Information Architecture

* Structural design of shared information environments
* Users flow through your product
* Catalog user's information
* Presentation of the information
* Decision driving function

#### Knowledge Organisation/Classification

##### Taxonomy

* Practice of classification based on **hierarchical** relationship
* Parent-child hierarchies
* Example
    - Wikipedia content section
    - Category navigation: Fruits & Veges --> Fruits --> Cherry

##### Folksonomy

* Practice of classification based on **non-hierarchical** relationship
* Public tags and their frequencies
* Examples
    - Hashtags

##### Domain Analytics Approach

* Practice of classification based on **sociological-epistemological** view
* Indexing to fulfill a task by specific group

##### Card sorting methods

Cloased card sort

* Participants get a stack of cards --> Participants sort cards into groups the researched created
* While it may be more difficult to sort cards into groups because participants have no control over the groups, it's not enough of a friction point
    - ...

Open card sort

* Participants get a stack of cards --> Participants sort cards into groups --> Participants label groups

#### Static Representations

Recall, sketches, wireframes, and mockups are stati representations of the product

* Works for creating design ideas

### Prototype Design

Prototypes are **interactive** design models of the product

* Used for testing and evaluation
* Low-fidelity, high-fidelity
    - eg. Paper-prototyping
        + Easy to visualize user flow, but difficult to understand interaction between screens
        + Still, we can explore what happens when a button is selected
            * Basically, can add interaction using arts & crafts
    - High-fidelity prototypes are closer to the final product
        + Has higher level of details
    - Breadth: number of covered featuers
    - Depth: degree of functionaliy
    - Appearance: building means
    - Input methods: device mediation

#### Low-fidelity

* Low-tech, partial functionality, simulated interaction

#### High-fidelity

* High-tech, "Full" functionality, true interaction

#### Creating Paper Prototypes

* One solid base
* Separate sketches for each screen
* Input-related elements
* Separate sketches for overlays
* Sketches for changing elements
* Simulate intended layout
* Consistent style of elements
* High-level content where possible
* Minimum colours
* Should look and feel like a sketch
* Work fast
    - Make it large, add ideas as they come, make it monochrome, one sketch per screen, use verbal description, preprint widgets

#### How about testing and evaluation?

1. Identify testing goals

* What do you want to know?
    - Tasks we want to investigate can be adhoc/active
        + eg. How would you delete a tile from the homescreen?
            * And when they user tries to do it, they'll literally look for something (like a close button). If they can't find it, this is good feedback to work with
* What aspects of UX are you evaluating?
    - eg. Want to assess findability, efficiency of navigation, etc
* What aspects are the most risky?
* What do we want to pay the most attention to?

2. Identify items to test

* Which component/features are you testing
    - If we want to assess efficiency of navigation, we want to test the navigation implementation
* How "deep" do you test each feature
* Which tasks are you evaluating

3. Choose testers

* Identify users group
* Identify user's level (novice, experienced, expert)
* ~5 testers is usually enough

4. Prepare materials

* Main prototype with all screens, elements, and input methods
* Additional materials to make changes on the fly
* Recording setup (optional, but very helpful)

5. Assign team roles

* Ideally, three roles
    - "Computer"
        + When a user "clicks" a button, something should change. The "computer" makes these physical changes
    - Interview
    - Note-taker

6. Run evaluation

* **The Wizard of Oz (Offline Zero) technique**
    - A human simulates the responses of the system
    - In on room, the participant would say something into the mic, and the researcher in the other room will quickly input something to change the screen
        + ie. Not a real computer, just a dude behind the screen
    - Need detailed test-plan with test scenarios
        + So you can make changes/reactions of the system quickly
    - Script of instructions for the facilitator, wizard, participants
    - Procedure for the wizard to properly respond to input from a participant
    - The "wizard"

*In general, however*

* Present a task script to your participant
* Give goals, not directions/instructions
    - You're investigating how the user would navigate towards the tasks (the directions). If you tell them, you're defeating the purpose
* Ask about reasons, opinions, suggestions
    - Get the participant to think out loud 
    - When they behaviour what you believe to be abnormally, ask them to talk through what they're doing
        + What buttons they're pressing, why, what they expected, etc
        + The idea is to quickly assess something on paper, not that it has to be done on paper

_Some things to consider_

* Put the participant at ease
* Ask questions that qualify the participant
* What are the triggers and conditions for the activity?
* Dig deeper if the user is vague/brief
* What do you notice?
    - These responses can often result in false-positives. Take them with a grain of salt
    - If there's something they should notice, but they don't, note that down
* Ask if things are as they expected (to see, to happen)
* Note down unanticipated actions (eg. if they want to see everything, but you only show one at a time)
    - Also, paper prototypes (with the right materials) can let you accomodate unanticipated actions
        + eg. the girl colouring the cat
            * She painted the background, something you didn't anticipate
            * Still, you have crayons, so you just fill it in anyways
* Participants don't have to be in your target demographic, but it can be good to consider their preferences
