---
title:  "2018-01-09-MSCI311"
date:   2018-01-09 00:00:00 -0400
categories: MSCI311
layout: post
---
# MSCI 311


## MODULE 1


#### Different Approaches to Organizations

Organizations are difficult to define, but we can try

* 6 blind men
	* Our current understanding of organizations is based on a large amount of peoples' and consultants' experiences. However, every one of these individuals only had a partial view of the organization


### 1A Defining Organizations: Based on a Common Goal

* A collection of individuals deliberately structured to achieve a pre-determined goal(s)
* Some **aspects** of an organization are obvious, some need to be identified on our own
	* Structure & design (non ad-hoc)
	* Goal-oriented
		* There is an extent of planning that is required as well. The organization is self-aware of its goals
	* Personality
		* An organization is a social system, hence social science qualities apply
		* People have their own goals, personalities, and attributes.
	* Somewhat of a permanent structure
		* Has to exist for some time, and be well-defined
	* Use technology
		* Information systems, operation know-how, etc.
	* Interact with the environment and landscape
* Prescriptive: Tells us what organizations ought to be, rather than what they are

Ideally, we have people working towards a defined goal. However, there are issues with this

* Goals aren't always easy to define
	* Can be irrational: visions, ideas, concepts, growth
	* Goals get transformed as they go down the hierarchy.
		* People approach it with their own perspectives and opinions, and sometimes they don't align with the overall 
* What is the common goal of the University of Waterloo? Do faculties, staff, and administrators have one common goal?


#### Our definition

An **organization is a set of formal and informal constraints** that result in **patterns of behaviour**

* Formal and informal constraints --> Patterns of behaviour
	* eg. Employees must be at work between 2-4PM (formal)
	* eg. Dress codes are sometimes formal, but often informal
		* Can **indicates a culture**
	* Don't tell us what an organization should be, but rather simply, if you want to define an organization, you must look at its patterns of behaviour, and analyze its constraints
* **Constraints regulate patterns of behaviour**


### 1B Understanding Organizational Theories

* Organizations are 'man-made'
* They are not the result of natural evolution
* Core competency
	* Federal government told universities to show that their resources and efforts are in alignment with their ...

**Management fads**

* Agile, hackatons, innovation landscapes, reward systems like employee stocks, etc.
	* What makes them management fads? These _new ideas_ are methods of introducing growth and fresh concepts
	* They come and go


#### Research considerations

Unit of analysis

* Tells us what theories are focused on: **the fundamental element of interest**
* Important to find the most suitable unit of analysis 	depending on what the research question is
* What might be the unit of analysis in researching the following questions?
	* What is the effect of market uncertainty on organizationl productivity?
		* Profit year-over-year, ...
	* What roles do participants take in organizational decision making?
		* People(?), the decisions being made(?), ...
* If studying a particular company, then results _should_ be very applicable to that company, but it won't be very generalizable
	* The focal point matters
* **Prescriptive Approaches**
	* eg. Take a break for 10 minutes every 50 minutes of work
	* eg. Do the most difficult work when feeling the best
* **Descriptive Approaches**
	* ...


### 1C Scientific Management

* Taylor's Theory?
* Take people's work and **modularize it**
	- Come up with the most optimal way of doing each task, and give workers indepedent tasks
		+ Implications in modern manufacturing
	- How do workers react to this kind of management?
	- Very much internal: didn't care about governments, suppliers, etc.
		+ Only tasks conducted by this organization
* Problems with this approach
	* **Limited applicability**
		* Physical v. cognitive tasks
		* Individual v. group tasks
	* **Undersirable consequences of optimization**
		* Repetitive work
			* No control over what is being done and how it is done
			* Workers are replaceable
		* Loss of autonomy
* **Prescriptive**
	- Told people what to do, and didn't care to consider workers' opinions

### 1D Bureaucracy

* Idea: Operate a business rationally and with efficiency
	* Bureaucracies are the backbones of organizations
	* The idea was to make organizations **as rational as possible.**
		* As soon as someone left the job, all of the knowledge they had is lost
			* Don't want to re-invent the wheel...
* Why not make organizations predictable in its structure?
	- This theory was interested in the **internal operations** of this organization
	- Was **prescriptive**
		+ Weber provided rules as to how the organization should be run
	- **Issues**
		+ Not very reactive
		+ Strict hierarchy means information and issues get lost as they travel through the levels

**Activity**: Apply the following rules to a UW job description
	1. The role/office must have fixed and official jurisdictional areas ordered by rules
		* It's clear what the position has authority/responsibility over
		* It's clear what the position should be doing
		* Doesn't matter who is hired (strengths, weaknesses, perspectives), the position is written in stone/policy
	2. Positions/roles have a firmly ordered office hierarchy
		* ie. chain of command
		* Know exactly who the position reports to, and who reports to the position
			* Not up for discussion
		* The higher up the hierarchy, descriptions become more vague (high-level)
	3. The activities of the office should be based on written documents (the files)
		* There are rules, documents, and files that dictate the position and its qualities

**Example**

* Mathematics Faculty Computing Facility --> Manager, Client Support Services Inst
	1. External support activities, management of assigned technical projects, internal support activities, computer systems admin, ...
		* This position has X key jurisdictional areas that they are responsible for; and, it is clear
	2. Supervises data support, and reports to Associate Dean of Computing
	3. What kind of files would this position generate/work with?
		* Compile documentation of internal space used by clients
		* Provide input into strategic budgeting decisions based on this information
* If you cannot find specific documents, consider generic files
	* eg. co-op managers have to deal with performance evaluations, etc.


##### There is no "Organization" without bureacracy

* Issues don't arise because bureacracy is implemented. They arise because there's too much bureacracy
	* It's not suitable, rules are outdated, rules are too restrictive
	* Sometimes, there's not enough bureacracy
	* This is a very important aspect of organizations. Finding the right balance is important.


##### Issues with bureacracy

* Rules are not always appropriate
	* Clinics "force" you to wait for test results before prescribing medication
		* What if the results are clear without waiting for a lab?
		* eg. Can't we take shortcuts to get simple antibiotics against strep throat?
* Rules are hard to change
	* 
* Making decisions based on limited information
	* Every time information moves up on the hierarchy, information gets lost
	* Higher-ups don't always read entire reports written by lower-level employees


### 1E Human Relations

Existence of informal organization (social organization) with its own normals, values, and expectations

* Social organization has a great impact on productivity
* The Hawthorne studies have had a great influence on modern organizational science
	* Managing involves getting things done through people
	* As such, management should focus on employee attitudes, perspectives, and interpersonal relations
		* ie. individual behaviour
* Main concern was internal operations
* **Descriptive approach**, where they looked to test productivity
	- Gained much insight as to how to improve organizations

##### Issues

* Group decision making (to make everyone happy) is not always feasible
	* Too much input --> too difficult to coordinate
	* Mutually exclusive expectations, can't satisfy them all
* Cultural change is difficult


### 1F Systems View

A system is a series of **interconnected** and **interdependent** things

* Sub-components are in continuous interaction with its environment
* Abstract way of thinking about organizations
* **Unit of analysis**
	- Cycle of events that occur

Focal persons and role senders are in a cycle of adaptation

* Ethan might originally perceive a role based on the job description, but his manager who wasn't there for the interview might have different expectations
* This dissonance undergoes _cycles_ of adaptation, until it's worked out
	- Ethan can be stubborn, which makes the system require more cycles
* Allon, the manager, sends his expetations of the role in, perhaps, suggestions of improvement.
	- Ethan can change, and start receiving the "right" role


##### Problems

Very ambiguous level of analysis (chicken & the egg)

* An entity's behaviour can only be studied once its subsystems and environment are identified, but you can't do that unless you understand the entity
* This approach is very **complex** and requires detailed definitions of the system
	- This can be difficult to do well, esp. when studying the organization from an external point-of-view.


### 1G Contingency Theory

* Best management and organizational design depends on context
* There is no single optimum design for all possible conditions in an organization
	- The _goodness_ of an organization design depends on a number of variables
	- Just like a person's behaviour is a function of the person's personality, perspective, and situation, **an organization's sturcture emerges as a function of its internal and external environment**.
		+ Based on these relevant factors, contingency theory can suggest the best way to structure the organization
* This approach to studying organizations has sometimes been criticized as boiling down to _recipes for success_.
	- In many ways, this approach is not novel
	- Managers have always known that the effectiveness of their management methods depend upon a number of factors


##### Other Approaches

* Decision theory
	- Some believe that a manager's primary responsibility is to make decisions
		+ Given this, the decision theory focuses on understanding and improving decision making at all levels in organizations
* Management science approach
	- Derived from decision theory, management is an exercise in mathematical processes
	- The focus of the approach is **optimization**


## MODULE 2


### Introduction

The **structure of an organization** can be defined as, simply, the sum total of the ways in which it **divides its labour** into distinct tasks and then achieves **coordination** among them


### 2B1 Labour Division

* Cashier
	- Taking orders, inputting orders into the system
* Make order
	- Preparing coffees, sandwiches, and or grabbing pastries
	- Bake pastries, breads, etc
* Cleaning
* Drive-through

**Benefits**

* Specialization, the way in which labour is divided into distinct tasks
* Expert performance
	- If the task is simple (enough) you can get very good at it
* Simple tasks mean less training time
	- The more divisions, the quicker it is to learn
* Minimum dependence on labour
	- Workers are easily replaced

**Disadvantages**

* The more labour is divided, the more difficult it is to achieve coordination
	- Makes sense, as you're adding more variables to the equation
* Worker alienation
	- No ownership over the task. The worker has no control/responsibility over the task except to just do it


### 2B2 Design Variable: Coordination

* Everyone knows what they're supposed to do
* Communication (talking, headsets)
* Screens that show orders and take order inputs
* Scheduling
* Training
* Work instructions/manual for prepping food, etc
	- Visual representations
* Manager

**Requirements**

* Communication, Coooperation/Collaboration (want to do so), Capacity (able to do so)


##### Mutual Adjustment

Most basic form of coordination

* Informal communication between two or more people
* Example
	- Two people crossing a river on a canoe
		+ They paddle in coordination by simply talking to each other
* This simple form is used at all levels of organizations in all organizational types


##### Direct Supervision

One takes responsibility for the work of many

* Example: Rowing
	- 1, 2, 4, or 8 rowers + coxswain
		+ Coxswain steers, communicates with the rest of the team to do manuevers
		+ Gives steering commands, motivation, and feedback
		+ 8-man rower boats always have a coxswain
* In general, direct supervisors and/or managers coordinate the work


##### Standardization

* Coordination incorporated when job is designed
* **Standardization of work processes**
	- Contents of work are **specified**, or programmed
	- Specific instructiosn on how to do something
		+ Reduces the need for a supervisor
* **Standardization of outputs**
	- Results of the work are specified (eg. dimensions of a product)
	- Specific instructions as to what the output should look like
		+ Mock-ups, designs, etc
* **Standardization of skills**
	- eg. a painter has understandings of the skills required
		+ You don't tell him how to paint and what to paint with
		+ You don't tell him what it should look like, otherwise you wouldn't need a painter

**Exercise**

When assembling IKEA furniture, the package comes with assembly instructions

* This is standardization of work processes
	- Tools are provided, and how to use them is specified
	- Note, there can also be standardization of output, but in this case, you probably don't need to be given the output specifics to build a piece of IKEA furniture


### 2B3 Design Variable: Shape of Organizations


##### Span of Control

How many people should report to a manager, maximum?

* Software: 6, <5
* Tim Hortons: 8-15
* Assembly line: 8-15
* Academic Units (eg. Chair of the Department of Management Sciences): 26

Context matters

* Weber used to think that the right number was approx. 7
* In modern organizations, it is seldom correlated with other factors like industry, workers' complexity of tasks, etc
* **Span of control directly affects whether an organization has flat vs. tall structure


##### Flat vs. Tall

...


### 2B4 Design Variable: Decision Making

Another important design variable in determining the organizational structure is the level of **centralization, which is a measure of decision-making power.**

* Organizations vary from **decentralized** (many have decision-making power) to **centralized**
* More centralized: decisions are made higher-up in the hierarchy
	- eg. Academic institutions are notoriously centralized
* More decentralized
	- Have to reduce control for certain positions
	- More delegation of decisions
* Issues
	- Highly centralized organizations introduce overload
		+ Low number of decision makers make a higher number of decisions
	- ...and loss of flexibility
		+ Have to wait for your supervisor's supervisor's manager to make a decision
	- Highly de-centralized organizations have high expertise but reduced consistency and control
		+ eg. professors teaching courses


### 2B5 Grouping of Tasks

...


## Module 3


### 3A Introduction

What is communication?

* The sending and receiving of messages between two or more people
	- eg. teaching, gossiping, meeting
* The exchange of information and transmittion of meaning
* All procedures by which one mind may affect another

Types

* Verbal v. Non-verbal
* Examples
	- Watching the news, reading the news, etc

All human behaviour can be used to communicate?

* Yes
	- You don't have to speak to communicate something	


##### Interpersonal Communication

Information is sent from one person to another (or others). This implies a **transfer of meaning** between parties

* Social process
	- Since more than one person is involved, social factors will influence transfer of meaning
		+ Speaking with interviewers and employers is much different than speaking with friends
* Context-related
	- The meaning of words changes with respect to context
		+ eg. if I look for nails at Home Depot, it's easy to see I'm not looking for a manicure


### 3B Shannon's Information Theory

A mathematical model of communication with significant influence on psychology

* Source
	- Produces a message or sequence of messages (out of a set of possible messages) to be communicated to the receiver
		+ eg. mind conjures a message using brain signals
* Encoder
	- Operates on the message in some way to produce a signal suitable for transmission over the channel
		+ eg. mouth encodes brain signals into audible soundwaves
* Channel
	- The medium usd to transmit the signal from transmitter (encoder) to receiver (decoder)
		+ eg. the air
* Decoder
	- Performs the inverse operation of that done by the encoder, reconstructing the message from the signal
		+ eg. eardrums transform soundwaves into brain signal
* Destination
	- The person or thing for whom the message is intended


#### Basic concepts of Information Theory


##### Uncertainty

Uncertainty is a **gap in knowledge** --> A measure of the amount of information needed to know the state of the system precisely

* It contains the **number of possible outcomes/events and their probabilities**
	- eg. consider X = Ada's grade in the course. Unless we are told what it is, we have 100 possibilities
		+ If we know marks can be no lower than 32, then we've reduced the set of possibilities
		+ If we know the average (70), then we have a 50% chance Ada's mark is below 70, and 50% that it is above 70


Why is the game of 20 questions so effective?

* We reduce the uncertainty significantly (if played well) every turn. 20 questions is more than enough to ascertain the information


##### Information


##### Redundancy

Extent to which one part of the message reduces uncertainty in another part of the message

* The extra information is unnecessary
	- eg. "h _ _ _"
		+ What could this word be? We still aren't sure, but it's a lot more clear than when we didn't have the 'h'
* Redundancy **can be beneficial**
	- esp. when safety is important, or when channel is noisy
		+ If you want to ensure that the message is transmitted, redundancy can help ensure it is seen
			* Sending a message multiple times but in different mediums ensures it is safely received
		+ If the channel is noisy, can lose a part of the message. Redundancy can ensure the full (or close-to-full) message is transmitted


#### Communication Effectiveness

This concerns the success with which the meaning conveyed to the receiver leads to the desired conduct on his part

* Encoded message at the source **must be the same** as the decoded message at the destination


##### When does miscommunication happen?

* A message may be altered in noisy or lossy channels, where it may gain or lose bits of information that may significantly change its meaning
	- eg. bad phone signal
* When the sender and receiver have different priorities
	- In other words, the decode may decode the message correctly, but the destination might interpret it differently, whether on purpose or by accident
		+ This sounds like the decoder's problem too, but whatever...
* Different people have different categorial knowledge
	- People generally organize knowledge according to a hierarchy of categories
		+ We categorize bananas and apples as fruit, which is a sub-category of food
	- Now, consider the communication between a doctor and her patient
		+ Her knowledge of organs, symptoms, and diseases is much more complex. Even asking something like "Have you had any prior significant health concerns" can be cause for miscommunication
			* The patient might not know what qualifies as a health concern


### 3C Communication in Organizations

* Downward communication usually constitutes
	- Information on goals
	- Job instruction
	- Feedback on subordinates' performance
	- Examples
		+ Quick messages to approve something
		+ Quarterly results for motivation
		+ Commands and instructions
		+ Structural changes from executives
		+ Town halls for organizational updates and connections	
* Upward communication
	- Update managers/supervisors on projects
	- Update on issues
	- Provide feedbacks for supervisors to help them
	- Reporting about work accomplished
	- Positive reporting (give information a positive spin)


#### E-communication

As more organizations become global, and virtual communication technologies improve, much of an organization's communication becomes **exclusively virtual**.

* Emails, instant messaging, texting, video chats, etc
	- These have become methods of choice even when face-to-face communication is an option
* Virtual communication has the advantage of keeping an accurate trail of the message
	- esp. written form
		+ Even videos with transcripts are good enough
	- These messages can be accurately described or traced when needed
* On the other hand, negative implications include coordination of complex tasks
	- Increase in number of messages does not necessarily lead to better task coordination

**Example**

Consider a team working on a new product. Any team member will likely receive 150-200 emails a day!

* This is overwhelming, and has significant implications in shaping how employees handle their work
	- They might end up spending more time replying to emails than usual
	- In meetings, they'd be replying to messages instead of contributing or learning
	- Or, they'll likely respond to priority messages only
	- They'll respond quickly, but say nothing important
* Another implication is its **effect on help-seeking and help-giving behaviour.**
	- Face-to-face requests are supposedly 34 times more successful than an email
	- If someone emailed you vs. dropped by your office to ask in person?
		+ The latter seems more successful (pro-social behaviour)


## Module 4: Organizational Environments


### Introduction

A system's view of an organization was our first view of an organization that didn't live in a vacuum

* The environment has effects on how an organization behaves

How does an organization handle **environmental uncertainty**?


### 4A Organizational Environments and Their Uncertainty


#### General environment

- Anything and everything that can affect an organization, whether the it plans for it or not, regardless of whether it's aware of it or not.
	+ **Any** factor that can potentially influence all or parts of the organization
		* Ecological
		* Cultural
		* Economic
		* Legal
		* Sociological
		* Political
		* Market
- **Examples of factors**
	+ Minimum wage increases affect some organizations (Tim Hortons) --> **Legal**
	+ Generational shifts in the workforce/customers --> **Cultural/Sociological**
		* How organizations manages itself (different hires)
		* How it designs and develops its products to serve a different customer-base
	+ Change in the political climate --> **Political/Legal**
		* Affects skilled workforce recruitment
			- Organizations relying on immigration workforces
			- Canadian Universities are experiencing a "Trump Bump," where grad-school applications in Canada have significantly increased year-by-year
	+ Busy hurrican season affects construction/insurance companies --> **Ecological**
	+ Rise and fall of demand in general, esp. bitcoin & crypto-currencies --> **Market/Economic**
		* Affects decisions that can/should be made regarding the currency
	+ Data regulation in Europe affects high-tech companies --> **Legal**
	+ Interest rate changes --> **Economic**
		* Has various affects on many industries
			- eg. Down --> Stimulates real-estate market
	+ Cultural expectations regarding organizational power, management styles, working hours, gender relations, work-life balance --> **Cultural**
		* eg. in 2009, UW opened a satellite campus in Dubai
			- There was concern regarding the human rights climate in Dubai at the time. Openly-LGBT professors weren't guaranteed the same working environment available in Canada
- Also note that some organizations cannot physically care about every factor in the environment


#### Task Environment

Regarding the final point above, these factors form a subset of general environment factors

* These are factors in direct influence of the organization's goal setting and goal attainment
	- eg. customers, demand, suppliers, competition, government


#### Organizational Set

Set of _other_ organizations that are part of the same task environment of the organization, with with the organization interacts

* Competitive, co-operative, symbolic vs. substantive
	- eg. GM vs. Toyota
	- eg. GM & Magna (supplier)
* A symbolic relation refers to licensing agreements
* A substantive relationship refers to more in-depth co-operation between two companies trying to achieve something together
	- eg. Deloitte + TD in blockchain projects


#### Enacted Envrionment

What constitutes an organization's environment?

* Some organizations do not have sufficient resources to handle every factor
* Sometimes, two similar organizations have different factors of emphasis
* **Organizations are not rational**
	- A = B for one company
	- B = C for another
	- Does not mean A = C

**Portion of the environment that is perceived and acted upon

* The same _actual_ external envrionment can be perceived differently by different managers
	- eg. Depending on who you ask (the dean, chair, associate chair, faculty), challenges and factors are seen differently
		+ For example, some see threats, others see opportunity


#### What is environmental uncertainty?

Recall, `Uncertainty = Information Needed - Information Available`

Two variables of envrionmental uncertainty

* **Complexity**
	- Number of heterogeneity of external elements that affect the organization
* **Stability, or Dynamism**
	- Unpredictability
	- The extent of changes to the environment is unstable
		+ They can change in severity, magnitude, etc
		+ The more they change, the more dynamic the environment
	- It's not that it's changing, it's that its unpredictable in is changes
		+ Seasonal changes is expected, so doesn't really qualify for instability


### 4B1: Making the organization more organic

How do organizations manage environmental uncertainty?


#### Internal Actions

Development of more **organic** structures (Burns & Stalker studies)

* Background
	- Studied electronics firms in Britain in the 50s
	- With each firm, they focused on two functional units
		+ Manufacturing
			* Low uncertainty
				- Low complexity (simple)
				- High stability (stable)
		+ R&D
			* High uncertainty
				- High complexity (complex)
				- Low stability (dynamic)
	- Observed two radically different (and emerging) structures


##### Manufacturing --> Mechanistic (Bureaucracy)

- Rigid task specialization
- Rigid hierarchy
- Centralized
- Vertical communication
- Standardization


##### R&D --> Organic (Adhocacy)

- Adhoc: "As it comes": Things changed depending on task and managers
- Continuously re-defined tasks
- Network structure of control
- Decentralized
- More horizontal communication
- Mutual adjustment

As a department, you aren't dealing with everything that happens in the environment


##### Summary

* Manufacturers aren't dealing with patents, they're dealing with suppliers
	- Long-term contracts, suppliers
		+ These things don't change often. Manufacturing only really cares about efficiency
* R&D deals with patents and innovation
	- Lots of changes


##### Conclusion

The tasks of the organization/department also had an affect on the structure/heuristic of the company

Is one better than the other?

* No, as different structures serve particular organizations better
* What is the advantage of having a mechanistic structure in an low uncertainty environment?
	- Don't need to be as reactive to environmental changes
		+ Allows the organization to focus on efficiency instead of worrying about changing
		+ Don't get efficiency when everybody is changing their tasks all the time
		+ Recall: Bureaucracy and standardization isn't bad, it just needs to be at the right amount


### 4B2: Managing differentiation levels

**B. Lawerence & Lorsch studies (Introduction)**

* Background
	- Compehensive study of 100s of companies, in various industry sectors
	- Within each organization, they looked at 3 departments
		+ R&D
		+ Manufacturing
		+ Sales
			* These departments capture a range of environmental factors

Difference between functions in the firms in the plastics industry: collected 4 variables

* Level of **formalization**
	- How bureaucratic, basically
* **Planning time horizon**
	- eg. How much of your time is devoted to activities that contribute to profits within
		+ 1-3 months
		+ 3-12 months
		+ over a year from now
* Primary goals
* Interpersonal orientation

**R&D**

- Low formalization
- Flat structures
- Conducted infrequent performance reviews
- Had few written rules & procedures
- Primary goal was the development ofn ew products (eg. new types of plastics with new characteristics)
- Employees in R&D structured their work mostly around completing tasks --> task-oriented
- However, some level of mutual adjustment (discussing with colleagues) was necessary

**Manufacturing**

- High formalization
- Short planning time horizon
- Efficiency is the primary goal
- Teams were task-oriented

**Sales**

- High formalization
- Short planning time horizon
- Primary goals pertain to customer satisfaction and revenue
- Employees/teams are socially-oriented


#### Summary

As with the Burns & Stalker findings, the answer was found in the environments that departments were reacting to

* Different departments have different sub-environments
* Departments have different primary goals and emphases, and thus react to elements differently
	- Different sub-environments lead to different ways of organizing activities
* L&L called this **differentiation of departments**, referring to the difference in orientation of the management in each department
	- B&S referred to it as the difference between mechanistic and organic structures, while L&L refers to it as a different within the org. itself


High differentiation <--> different departments have different structures and orientations

* **Co-ordination issues**

Low differentiation <--> different departments have similar structures and orientations


### 4B3: Increasing Integration

How do we solve this coordination problem, mentioned earlier?

* Improve **integration** = **Extent of collaboration between departments**
	- **High departmental differentiation** must be matched with **high integration**

...


#### What does integration look like, nowadays?

* Product manager ~ Individual integrators
* Emails, forms, Instant messaging ~ Paper systems

...


## Winnepeg Sporting Goods Case Study

* Attributes of note
	- **Medium-sized dealer** in toys and sporting goods
	- **Manufacturing unit** & **head office**
	- Location: major cities
	- President is a carpenter by trade, so perspectives align with company directives
	- **110 employees**
	- **$11M annual sales**
	- Currently, **toy industry is booming** (competition landscape)
		+ Annual sales exceeding $1.5B
	- U.S. market for toys has experienced remarkable growth in the past decade, currently estimated to have about $20B annual sales
	- Major divisions are headed by managers who've been here 15+ years
		+ Decision makers are relatives or long-time friends of Campbell, the president
		+ **Not very tall**, **departmental/divisional**
		+ **De-centralized**
	- Competition is making headways, but WSG is not
	- Organic structure for each department
		+ Individuals are let loose to be themselves and contribute with their ideas as opposed to follow guidelines
	- **Low expenditure on R&D**
		+ Only three designers
		+ Also, low productivity
* Structure
	- Functional
		+ Departments are created by task, eg. Sales, Plant operations
	- Divisional
		+ Organization makes more than just toys, eg. Other operations and divisions
* Environment
	- Uncertainty?
		+ Complexity
			- Lots of competitors --> High
			- Many kinds of toys/products --> High
		+ Stability
			- Market is volatile, but trending upwards --> High
			- New companies are appearing --> High

Given its environments, are WSG's current structure and management practices appropriate? Not really.

* There's a lack of innovation, and the current structure contributes to that
* By being results focused, and due to a lack of R&D, new ideas/product don't appear often enough
	- Culture should probably be more open to failure
* **Lack of differentiation**
	- There's lots of uncertainty, so we need lots of differentiation
	- Decision makers are friends of the president, and have been around for 15+ years
		+ Not many new perspectives here
	- Lack of integration
		+ Don't like meetings, etc
* **No R&D**
	- Just three designers working out of manufacturing: no dedicated expenditure resources on R&D
	- If they had R&D, they could have more innovation and higher differentiation
		+ Resources
		+ Flexibility
		+ Not be obsessed with efficiency
* **Note**, there's also a leadership style that doesn't really work, but that's for MSCI 211 to discuss
	- Here, we're trying to discuss it from the perspective of organizational design