CS349, 2017-05-08

### Design Principles ###

The goals of "good design"

* What kind of devices do we want to make?
* Useful vs. usable

#### Example: A remote control ####

* Jakob Nielsen (UI Researcher) says he only uses 33% of the buttons on a remote control with regularity
* The others only cause confusion and clutter
* Obscure labels

As time goes by, devices (like remote controls) reach higher capabilities than humans

* Usefulness: meeting specific needs & supporting real tasks; the quality of being practically useful
    - If there's a high functionality (e.g. lots of items in a menu), usefulness may be high
* Useability: the effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfation with which users can achieve tasks in a particular environment with a product
    - If the interface is poor and tasks aren't easily done, then useability is low while usefulness may (or may not) be high.

In solutioning, we strive to achieve the optimal balance between the two.

#### Example: Refrigerator temperature control ####

Two controls: one for fridge and one for freezer. This implies that there are two systems/valves (or sources). However, these controls simply adjust the cold air flow coming from a single source, split into two.

* This is somewhat un-useable, due to a lack of transparency


### What can we learn? ###

* Help form correct mental models (fridges, doors, phones)
* Provide explicit controls for high-use functions
* Appearances should reflect or suggest usage
    - e.g. push plates when doors are push to open, and pull handles when doors are pull to open
* Low-use functions shouldn't have the same level of suport as high-use functions
    - e.g. volume buttons on a remote are much more often used than the "setting" button
* Give feedback of operations in progress
    - Helps improve transparency


### Mental Models ###
*Three models of a system*

* Developer's model
    - How the programmer believe the system should be used
* System model
    - The system itself
* User's (mental) model
    - How the user of a system believes the system should be used

The goal is to have these three images align as closely as possible. Mental models drive how users interact with a system


### Model of Interaction ###

> The basic idea is simple. TO get something done, you have to start with some notion of what is wanted — the goal that is to be achieved. Then you have to do something to the world, that is, take action to move yourself or manipulate someone or something. Finally, you check to see that your goal was made.

Four things to consider

* the goal
* what is done in the world
* the world itself
* the check of the world

The action itself has two major aspects:

* Doing something: *Execution*
    - What we want to do to the system
* Checking something: *Evaluation*
    - Comparing: what happened vs. our goal


