---
title:  "2017-05-12-CS349"
date:   2017-05-12 00:00:00 -0400
categories: CS349
layout: post
---
## CS349, 2017-05-12



### Visual Design

You need to present the elements of your interface to the user.
User needs to know

* What can I do in this interface?
* Where is the thing I'm looking for?
* What is expected of me?
* What is related to what?

The program wants to impose as little thinking as possible on the user. Allow them to concentrate on the task, not the interface

1. Highest level design goals
    * Make supported actions clear
    * Create desired relationships and avoid undesired relationships
2. Create a presentation that...
    * Has an attractive look
    * Is easy to understand at a galance
    * Has a distinctive, recognizable look.
3. Avoid a presentation that...
    * Is cluttered/hard to organize
    * Is hard to perceive clearly
    * Contains excessive idiosyncrasy
    * Makes the user stop to think about avoiding errors

**Design with the human brain's conscious and unconscious capabailities in mind**

1. Keep things simple
    * people have limited cognitive processing power
2. Leverage pre-attentive processes
    * make design seem intuitive, obvious, and focused

**Pre-attentive processes**

* Happen at a lower level than conscious thought
* Do a huge amount of work out of sight, and gives your conscious mind the results


#### Simplicity

> In anything at all, perfection is finally attained not when there is no longer anything to add, but when there is no longer anything to take away.
> 
> Antoine de Saint Exupery

* Present the **minimum amount** of information to achieve **maximum effect**
* Simplicity leads to quickly recognized and understood functionality
    - Less information means less process time
    - Can produce correct mental models more effectively/quickly
* Simplicity also aids recall
    - Less to remember. Easier to retain critical information

To achieve simplicity, reduce, reduce, and reduce.



### Organization and Structure

#### Gestalt Principles

* Structure doesn't occur naturally. It must be explicitly created and designed
* People will find order, even if none was intended
    - Don't just throw elements into a UI
* Need to explicity create the structure
    - Consciously consider what *placement* and *arrangement* communicates to the user
* Gestalt principles can help with this. Theories of visual perception that describe how people tend to organize visual elements into groups or unified wholes
* Clues about how the brain groups raw visual output

##### Proximity

Individual elements are associated more strongly with nearby elements than those further away
    * e.g. spacing stars more closely vertically gives the impression of columns. Closer horizontally gives the impression of rows.

##### Similarity

Elements associate more strongly when they share basic visual characteristics, such as

* shape
* size
* colour
* texture
* orientation

##### Good continuation

Our visual system is biased to perceive continuous forms rather than disconnected segments

* Elements arranged in a straight line or smooth curve are perceived as being more related than elements not on the line or curve.
* See slides 22-24

##### Grouping v. Ambiguity

...

##### Closure

We tend to see a complete figure even when parts of the information is missing. We tend to perceive a set of individual elements as a single, recognizable pattern, rather than multiple individual elements.

* Generally, we can fill in the gaps.
    - e.g. Positive/negative designs
    - e.g. Cascading windows: even without a distinct border on each window, we can usually recognize the borders of a window based on the content in the window

##### Figure/Ground

Our mind separates the visual field into the figure and the ground

* Figure is the visual element that is interpreted as being the object of interest
* Ground is the area on which it rests (and everythign else)

##### Law of Pragnanz

We tend to interpret ambiguous images as simple and complete, versus complex and incomplete

* Ambiguous images: those that can be interpreted in more than one way
* Images recalled from memory are simplified
* Design
    - Minimize the number of elements
    - Symmetrical composition is perceived as simpler

##### Uniform connectedness

Elements connected to one another by uniform visual properties are perceived to be more related than elements that are not connected

Two typical strategies

1. connecting lines
2. common regions

##### Alignment

Not necessarily a Gestalt principle, but it is a powerful organizing tool

* Some in the design community include it, but it doesn't appear in the original lierature
    * for exams, it is

