---
title:  "2017-05-31-CS349"
date:   2017-05-31 00:00:00 -0400
categories: CS349
layout: post
---
## CS349, 2017-05-31



### ANIMATIONS

A simulation of movement created by displaying a series of pictures, or frames

* Animation: drawing frames at a consistent rate
* Goals
    - Move things around on the screen
    - Repaint 24-60 times per second
    - Make sure events are handled on a timely basis
    - Don't use more CPU than necessary
    - Easily understood code


#### Cats Eyes X style

```
public void eventLoop() throws InterruptedException {
    while (true) {
        if (this.myEventQueue.hasEvents()) {
            this.handleEvent(this.myEventQueue.nextEvent());
        }
    }
    this.handleAnimation();
    this.paintComponent(this.getGraphics());
    Thread.sleep(1000/this.FPS);
}
```

Why do the eyes move slower than the mouse?

* There is one event per pixel moved. We update the frames 30 times per second, but there's too many events to process!
    - solution could be to separate the event handling speed and the frame handling
        + let the thread sleep only when there are no events to process(?)


#### Screen Flicker During Drawing

* Suppose you are animating two balls on the display in a game.
* As the balls get closer, you notice that one seems to flicker.
    - If you paint balls sequentially, then you might clear a rectangle of the first ball's position, paint the first ball in the new position, then clear rect for the second ball and paint the second ball.
    - Ball 1 has a bite taken out of it or maybe even vanishes until next update

**Flickering**: when an intermediate image is on the display
 
* Need to ensure that only complete images are drawn
* Solution
    - Create an off-screen image buffer
    - Draw to the buffer
    - Copy the buffer to the screen as quickly as possible (between refreshes)
* In X, this is a manual process
* In most other situations, it is done for you


#### Double Buffering [L11_S12]


#### Java Code: Double Buffering

* Modern toolkits often have double-buffering built-in
    - e.g. in Java Swing, it is built into the JComponent class (which is a base class for all/most drawable components, so they inherit this functionality)

`public boolean isDoubleBuffered()`
`public void setDoubleBuffered(boolean o)`

* Double-buffering is enabled by default!
    - if set in top-level container, all subcomponents will be doubled buffered, regardless of individual settings


#### Java: Animation Using a Timer in Java

```
class ColouredX extends JComponent {
    ...
    private Point ballPos = new Point(100, 0);
    private final int FPS = 40;
    private Timer timer;

    public ColouredX() {
        this.addMouseListener(...);
        this.timer = new Timer(1000/FPS, new ActionListener() {
            @Override public void actionPerformed(ActionEvent e) {
                ballPos.y += 2; repaint();
            }
        });
        this.timer.start();
    }

    /* Paint ball in new location */
    public void paintComponent(Graphics g) {
        ...
        g2.setColor(Color.ORANGE);
        g2.fillOval(this.ballPos.x, this.ballPos.y, 30, 30);
    }
```

__Note__

* If you adjust your frames per second, be careful you may also be adjusting the number of updates for second.
    - If you start updating more frequently, your object will move faster, since you're using less time to translate the same distance
* Assignment 2 involves improving animations



### Model-View-Controller

__Observations__

* When one view changes, other(s) often need to change as well.
    - Ideally, we want a single representation of the underlying data, and multiple views of that data
* The user interface code probably changes more and faster than the underlying application
    - many recent changes in MS Office were to UI code
    - Excel's underlying functions and data structures are probably very similar to Visicalc, the original spreadsheet
* How do we design software to support these observations?


#### Possible Design: Tight Coupling

```
Cell\[\]\[\] cells;
    \+ void setCell(...)
    \+ Object getCell(...)
    \- void paintGraph(...)
    \- void paintTable(...)
    \- void paint(...)
```

* Issues with bundling everything together
    - What if we want to display data from a different type of source?
        + e.g. Database
    - What if we want to add new ways to view the data?
* Primary problem
    - Tight coupling of data and presentation prevents easy modification and extension
