---
title:  "2017-06-19-CS349"
date:   2017-06-19 00:00:00 -0400
categories: CS349
layout: post
---
## CS341, 2017-06-19


### Undo/Redo


#### Direct Manipulation Principles

__Recall__

User should be able to explore without (severe) consequences

* Reversibility of (almost) all actions helps achieve this


#### Benefits of Undo

* Undo lets you recover from errors
    - Input errors (human) and interpretation errors (computer)
    - Allows the user to work quickly (without fear)
        + small mistakes can be undone
* Undo enables exploratory learning
    - Users mainly learn by trying manipulations of visual objects rather than by reading extensive manuals
    - try things you don't know the consequence of
    - try alternative solutions
    - removes fear and commitment to decisions
* Undo lets you evaluate modifications
    - fast do-undo-redo cycle to evaluate last change to document (and see the changes visually)


#### Checkpointing

* A manual undo method
    - you can save the current state so you can rollback later
    - eg. a video game
    - eg. source code version control


#### Undo Design Choices

* In any undo-redo implementation, we need to consider the following design choices
    - Undoable actions
        + What can't be/isn't undone
        + Not all actions need to be (manually) undo-able
            * eg. if you move a character to the right, you don't "undo" it, you just move back to the left
    - UI State Restoration
        + What part of the UI is restored after undo?
    - Granularity
        + How much should be undone at a time?
    - Scope
        + Is undo/redo global in scope, local, or someplace in between?
        + eg. if several documents are open, undos should be limited to the focused document
* No single answer, but we have guidelines (above)


#### Undoable Actions

* Some actions may be omitted from undo
    - eg. change to selection (just reselect another)
    - eg. window resizing
    - eg. scrollbar positioning
* Some actions are destructive and not easily undone
    - eg. quitting a program with unsaved data or emptying trash
* Some actions cannot be undone
    - eg. printing a document

__Suggestions__

* All changes to document (ie. the model) should be undoable
* Changes to the view, or the document's interface state, should only be undoable if they are extremely tedious or require significant effort
* Ask for confirmation before performing a destructive action which cannot easily be undone
    - eg. confirm when emptying trash


#### UI State After Undo

* What is the user interface state after an undo or redo?
    - eg. highlight text, delete, undo
        + is the text highlighted?
    - eg. select file icon, delete, undo
        + is file icon highlighted?

__Suggestions__

* User interface state should be meaningful after undo/redo action is performed
    - change selection to object(s) changed as a result of undo/redo
    - scroll to show selection, if necessary
    - give focus to the control that is hosting the changed state
* Why? These provide additional undo feedback
    - Show the user something happened


#### Granularity

* What defines one undoable "chunk"?
    - chunk is the conceptual change from one document state to another state

__Examples__

* MS Word
    - string delimited by any other command
        + bold, mouse click, autocorrect, etc...
* Sublime
    - token delimited by whitespace
        + a chunk is the entire whitespace-delimited word. When we undo, we remove the chunk, not each individual character

__Example__: Draw a Line

* MouseDown to start line
* MouseDrag to define line path
* MouseUp to end line
* MouseDown + MouseDrag + MouseUp = 1 conceptual chunk to "draw line"
    - "undo" should probably undo the entire line, not just a small delta in the mouse position during MouseDrags

__Suggestions__

* Ignore intermediate states when under continuous interactive control
    - eg. resizing or moving an object
        + ignore the individual pixels during the drag
* Chunk all changes resulting from an interface event
    - eg. find and replace all
        + undo will have to undo the entire thing, not just one instance of the word changed
* Delimit based on discrete input breaks
    - eg. words or sentences in text
    - eg. pauses in typing


#### Scope

* Is undo/redo global, local, or someplace in between?
* ...



### Implementation


#### Forward v. Reverse Undo

1. Forward Undo
    * save coplete baseline document state at some past point
    * save __change records__ to transform baseline document into current document state
    * to undo last action, __apply all the change records except the last one to the baseline document__
2. Reverse Undo
    * save complete current document state
    * save reverse __change records__ to return to previous state
    * to undo last action, __apply last reverse change record__

##### Implementation

Both these options require "change records." We have multiple ways of implementing these as well

1. Memento pattern
    * save snapshots of each document state
    * could be complete state or difference from "last" state
    * forward or reverse both just load a new document
2. Command pattern
    * ...


#### Undo Command Pattern

...


#### Java Undo

`javax.swing.undo.*`

* `UndoManager` keeps track of undo/redo command stacks
* `UndoableEdit` interface is the command to execute (redo) or un-execute (undo)
* Usually put UndoManager in Model for document context

```
import javax.swing.undo.*;
public class Model extends Observable {
    private int value = 0;
    private UndoManager undoManager;
    ...

    public void setValue(int v) {
        // create undoable edit
        UndoableEdit ue = new AbstractUndoableEdit() {
            final int old = value;
            final int new = v;
            
            public void redo() {
                value = newValue;
                notifyObservers();
            }

            public void undo() {
                value = oldValue;
                notifyObservers();
            }
        }

        this.undoManager.addEdit(ue); // add edit to manager
        this.value = v;
        notifyObservers();
    }
}
```


#### Triggering Undo or Redo

* Usually done with "undo" and "redo" menu items
    - with key Accelerators for CTRL-Z, CTRL-Y mapping

```
public void undo() {
    if (undoManager.canUndo())
        undoManager.undo();
}

public void redo() {
    if (undoManager.canRedo())
        undoManager.redo();
}
```

##### UndoDemo

* Model handles all undo actions
    - UndoManager resides in Model
    - setter save UndoableEdits (uses closure)
    - methods added for undo state: canRedo, canUndo
    - ...

...
