---
title:  "2017-05-15-CS349"
date:   2017-05-15 00:00:00 -0400
categories: CS349
layout: post
---
## CS349, 2017-05-15



### Visual Design, cont'd


#### Pleasing Layouts

Gestalt principles applied to user-interface layouts

* Lots in common with graphic design
* Four principles

1. Proximity

> Items relating to each other should be grouped close together. When several items are in close proximity to each other, they become one visual unit ... This helps organize information and reduces clutter
> 
> Williams, p. 14

2. Alignment

> Nothing should be placed on the page arbitrarily. Every element should have some visual connection with another element on the page. This creates a clean, sophisticated, fresh look.
> 
> Williams, p. 14

* Examples, edge alignment and center alignment

3. Repetition

> Repeat visual elements ... throughout the piece. You can repeat colour, shape, texture, spatial relationships, line thicknesses, sizes, etc. This helps develop the organization and strengthens the unity.
> 
> Williams, p. 14

4. Contrast

> The idea behind contrast is to avoid elements on the page that are mearly similar. If the elements (type, colour, size, line thickness, shape, space, etc) are not the same, then make them very different. Contrast is often the most important visual attraction on the page.
> 
> Williams, p. 14



### Applying Concepts

##### Common Mistakes

* Haphazard layout (no explicit design)
* Aligning labels, not controls
* Bounding boxes create clutter and compete for attention

##### Testing it out

* Show it to someone else
    - Don't ask if they like it, ask why.
    - Try to get first impressions
        + First impressions define whether or not the interface is good. You can't afford to rely on people "warming up" to your designs
* Use the squint test
    - Mimics early portion of visual recognition system

##### Impact

* Good visual design can reduce human processing time
* Tullis redesigned lodging information screens (1984)
    - 5.5s v. 3.2s average search times

##### Summary

* Strive for simplicity
* The Gestalt principles provide insights into the pre-attentive processes in the brain
* Use the principles to struture a visual design by...
    - grouping visual information into higher-level units
    - establishing relationships between related eleemnts
* Don't leave visual design up to chance
    - Think about your design
    - Test it out