2017-05-10-CS349

### UI Design Principles, cont'd

Design principles serve to

* reduce *gulf of execution* and *gulf of evaluation*
* create and reinforce a more correct mental model for the user

Aspects of design principles

1. Perceived affordances
2. Mapping
    - Physical actions of input device mapped to a UI instrument
    - Instrument's actions mapped to an object of interest
        + Degree of integration
            * ration of DOF of device to on-screen actions
        + Degree of compatibility
            * similarity in action and effect
    - Some things work well in the physical world, but not in virtual world
    - The relationship between two things: control movement and the effect it has in the world. Three types of mapping:
        + Layout
            * Burners on a stove and control dials should have the same arrangement
            * Radio buttons (single choice) should clearly map to a single section
        + Behaviour
            * Turning a car steering wheel in a certain direction should move the car in that direction
        + Meanings (conventions)
            * Emergency buttons are red
            * Up/clockwise means "more"
    - Components often mimic physical controls and follow the same conventions and mappings
3. Consistency
    - Designing interfaces to have similar operations and use similar elements for achieving similar tasks
    - Follows rules, such as using the same name operation to select all objects
        + e.g. hovering over an object, and left-clicking to select
        + e.g. right-click to bring up a context-menu w/ actions
4. Constraints
    - Guide by preventing certain actions while enabling/encouraging others
    - Example: Norman's Lego Motorcycle
        + Physical: Lego blocks only fit one way
        + Semantic: Based on meaning. E.g. windshield protects driver, so it should go in front of the seat
        + Cultural: Red "means" brake
        + Logical: The last piece goes in the last remaining spot
    - Example: "Settings" on slide 48
        + Physical: You can only slide the slider so far left or right, bounded by 0% and 100%
        + Semantic: Folder icons indicate that files can be placed inside
        + Cultural: The dropdown icon indicates the color selection can be expanded
        + Logical: Naming of folders map to specific organization(s)
    - There isn't a single set of cultural constraints. Certain places expect a RTL display. It's important to understand the audience when dealing with cultural constraints.
5. Visibility
    - ...
6. Feedback
    - Can happen at different levels
        + Widgets (like a button): do they articulate
            * that they are enabled or disabled?
            * that they have focus?
            * its current stateÉ
    - Does feedback communicate affordances?
    - When the user acts, does something happen on screen?
    - Is the user able to perceive new state of system model once the action is complete?
    - Examples of poor feedback:
        + Creating symbolic links in Linux
        + Online video buffering
    - Examples of good feedback:
        + Search and replace in Sublime Text
7. Metaphor
    - Set of unifying concepts in a GUI used to simplify interaction
    - Done by borrowing concepts from one domain (the source, or vehicle) and applying them to another (the target, or tenor)
    - Scale can vary from system, to application, to UI feature
    - Examples
        + Desktop metaphor in windowing systems
            * Microsoft Bob: metaphor gone too far. Does the desktop need to reflect your bedroom, or your workspace?
        + Assembly-line metaphor for a new car configurator
        + Shopping-cart metaphor for online shopping
        + Cassette tape player for music player
        + Stacked transparencies metaphor for layers in a graphics editor
        + Recycling bin metaphor for deleting files
    - Given an idea for a metaphor, analyze the contrasting features of source and target domain
    - Analyze relationship between features
        + too many features from base domain results in conceptual baggage
        + Too few features leads to confusion, poor mapping, poor metaphor
    - Experience to see if people can use metaphors to derive expectations of behaviours

