---
title:  "2018-01-03-CS343"
date:   2018-01-03 00:00:00 -0400
categories: CS343
layout: post
---
# CS 343

## Introduction


### 0.1 Why concurrency

* Processor speed has slowed (stopped)
* Use transistors from Moore's law for parallelism to increase speed
	* Every 18 months, double number of transistors
* But concurrent programming is still necessary to utilize parallel hardware
	* Very few devices run on single cores
* Some success in implicitly discovering concurrency in sequential programs
	* For a certain class of problems, can convert existing sequential programs into concurrent programs
* Alternately, programmer explicitly thinks about and specifies concurrency
	* Implicit and explicit approaches are complementary
	* Limitations of the implicit approach mandate the explicit approach


### 0.2 Why C++

* C++ is a dominant programming language
	* Based on C (large programmer- and code-base)
	* as efficient as C in most situations
	* Low-level features, eg. direct memory access, needed for
		* Systems programming
		* Memory management
		* Embedded / real-time
	* High-level features, eg. exception handling, objects, polymorphism, STL, etc.
	* Allows direct interaction with UNIX/Windows


### 0.3 Concurrency in C++

* C++ originally had no concurrency
	* C++11 only has simple concurrency
* Many different concurrency approahces for C++ have been introduced, with only varying degrees of adoption
* No de factor approach that dominates C++ concurrency programming
	* C has two but incompatible, pthreads and Win32
* C++'s simple concurrency limits its future in parallel computing
* Cannot be safely added to ANY language view library code


### 0.4 High-Level Concurrnecy

* In theory, and high-level concurrency approach can be used and adapted to C++. Some are better than others
	* C++ is class-based. Need to find a model that matches the models/architecture of your language
* We want a single consistent high-level powerful concurrency mechanism, but what should it look like?
* ...


### 0.5 mC++

Advanced control flow C++

* Integrated advanced control flow tightly packed into C++
	* Leverage class features
	* Threads are light-weight: M:N thread model versus 1:1
* Use mutex objects to contain mutual exclusion and synchronization


### 0.6 Outline

...


### 1 Advanced Control Flow (Review)

Basic and advanced control structures allow virtually any control flow

* Still, need more than ifs and whiles
	* eg. do-while, always at least once
		* whiles check at the top, and run through.
		* do-whiles run through, and checks at the bottom
		* What about the middle?

#### Multi-exit loop

```
for (;;) {
	// { priming }
	if (...) break;
}
```

* Can add loop index and take it out freely (as opposed to swap between whiles and fors)


### 1.1 Static multi-level exit

* Exit multiple control structures wher exit points are known at compile time
* Labelled exit (break/continue) provides this capability

```
mC++ / Java

L1: {
	// decs
	L2: switch (...) {
		L3: for (...) {
			...
			break L1; // exit block
			...
			break L2; // exit switch
			...
			break L3; // exit loop
		}
	}
}
```

### 1.2 Dynamic Memory Allocation

To avoid mark deductions, do not perform dynamic allocation unless necessary

* Dynamic allocation is bad for concurrent programming
* Sometimes, it's equally bad for sequential programming
* Stacks are more efficient for various reasons than heap allocation
	* Also, does not require explicit storage-management when working with stack

Fundamentally, when a variable's storage must outlive the block in which it's allocated, then it must be allocated on the heap

* Exceptions
	* Unknown amount of data (eg. reading from a stream)
		* Vectors heavily utilize the heap (in order to grow larger, needs to allocate heap space)
		* So, be careful of the structures you're using
	* ...
	* ...


### 2 Dynamic Multi-level Exit

* Routine activation (call/invocation) introduces complex control flow.
* Among routines, control flow is controlled by call/return mechanism.
	* Routine `h` calls `g` calls `f`
	* Cannot return from `f` to `h`, terminating `g`
* **Modularization**
	* Any contiguous code block can be factored into a (helper) routine and called from anywhere in the program (modulo scoping rules)
* Modularization fails when factoring exits, eg. multi-level exits
	* **Labels only have routine scope**
		* Be wary when moving labels and code (with variables) into a separate routine
		* This is a downstream consequence when switching a style of control flow

How would/could we fix this problem?

* Fundamentally, routines can have multiple outcomes
	* routine call returns normally, ie. statement after the call
	* exceptional returns, ie. control transfers to statements not after the call
		* eg. could not compute width or height, throw exception

[Notes 6]

* Fortran example
* Generalization of multi-exit loops and multi-level exits
* This Pattern addresses a few things
	* Algorithms can have multiple outcomes
	* Separating outcomes makes it easy to read and maintain a program
* Pattern does not handle case of multiple levels of nested modularization
	* ...

[Notes 7]

* Dynamic mutli-level exit extend call/return semantics to transfer in the reverse direction to normal routine calls, called a non-local transfer
* We can keep references of labels, and these are determined during run-time, hence dynamic exits

Non-local transfers

* Mechanism behind this is a label variable containing the tuple
	* Pointer to a block activation on the stack
	* Transfer point within the block
* **goto** L, in `f`, is a two-step operation
	* Direct control flow to the specified activation on the stack
	* Then go to the transfer point (label) within the routine
* Therefore, a label value is not statically/lexically determined
	* Recursion in `g` ==> unknown distance from `f` and `h` on stack
	* What if L is set during the recursion of `h`?
* Transfer between **goto** and label value causes termination of stack block
* ...


### 2.1 Traditional Approaches

* Return code
	* returns value indicating normal or exceptional execution
	* eg. printf() returns number of bytes transmitted, or a neg. val
* Status flag
	* Set shared (global) var indicating normal or exceptional execution
	* the val remains as long as it is not overwritten
	* eg. `errno` var in UNIX
		* Anytime a library routine is called, it will have a return code, put into `errno`
* Fix-up routines
	* a global and/or local routine called for an exceptional event to fix-up and return a corrective result so a computation can continue
	* eg. C++ has a global routine-pointer `new_handler` called when `new` fails
* Techniques are often combined
	* eg. we should probably check if printf() returns a neg. val, which indicates an error
	* We don't explicitly do this... ever
		* However, `errno` will be populated with `27`
		* `perror("printf:");
			* Looks up `errno==27` in its table and prints a message accordingly
	* Finally, can `abort()` if `printf()` fails
	* This means every library routine call should introduce a minimum of 3 additional lines
		* Who the fuck does this?
* Intermediate approach of return union, which mimics normal return type
* Return union combines result and return code, and checks code on result access
* ALL routines must return an appropriate union

[Notes 9]

* `malloc`, for instance, returns a storage, or a "no" message
	* ie. a union of the right and wrong outcome
	* Rust automatically dereferences and checks if `malloc` fails
		* Forces the check to be done, even if not explicitly performed
	* In Rust, it is literally a union: a struct that contains multiple values
		* eg. Result<void *, NoStorage>

Drawbacks

* Checking return code or status flag is optional
	* can be delayed or omitted, ie. passive vs. active
* Return code mixes exceptional and normal values
	* enlarges type or value range; normal/exceptional type/values should be independent
	* What if we can print negative characters? Then how can we find a value that could also be a return code?
	* If a routine uses all the positives and negatives, how can we steal one of those values to indicate an alternative result?
* Under no circumstance should a library routine abort the program
	* Should pass errors up so that someone else can make the decision as to what to do
	* The error should be passed up multiple levels (eg. A -> C, then back to A?)
* `errno` could have been changed many times since the error occurred
	*...
* Local fix-up routines increase the number of parameters
	* Increase cost of each call
	* Must be passed through multiple levels, enlarging parameter lists even when the fix-up routine is not used

...


### 2.2 Exception Handling (Model)

* Dynamic multi-level exit allows complex forms of transfers among routines
	* Exceptions aren't "errors"
	* They're a good way of moving away
	* Exceptions are alternate outcomes, though usually ancillary
	* Exceptional event is an event that is (usually) known to exist
		* Usually occurs with low frequency
		* eg. Division by zero, I/O failures, EOF
* Very difficult to simulate EHM using simpler control structures
* Exceptions are supposed to make certain programming tasks easier, like robust programs
* Robustness results because exceptions are active vs. passive; forcing programs to react immediately when an exceptional event occurs
* An EHM is not a panacea, and is only as good as the programmer using it


### 2.3 Execution Environment

* An OOP concurrent environment requires a more complex EHM than a non-object-oriented sequential environment
* Sometimes, need to walk through the stack frame and execute all destructores
	* Finally clauses are always executed
		* _Finally in mC++
* ...


### 2.4 Terminology

...


### 2.5 Static/Dynamic Call/Return